"date"	"text"	"ps_group"	"ps_group_1"	"ps_group_2"	"ps_group_3"	"ps_group_4"	"ps_group_5"	"ps_group_6"	"ps_group_7"	"ps_group_8"	"ps_group_9"	"ps_group_10"	"ps_group_11"	"ps_group_12"	"ps_group_13"	"ps_group_14"	"ps_group_15"	"ps_group_16"	"ps_group_17"	"ps_group_18"	"ps_group_19"	"ps_group_20"
"1"	2020-05-03	" Member of Parliament for Ningo Prampram Constituency, Sam Dzata George, has questioned the government’s delay in establishing an RTI board to commence the implementation of the RTI bill.
 He believes government does not need that much time since it was quick to establish a board for the COVID-19 Trust Fund.
 Sam George queried, “Does the president need 1 year to establish an RTI board? How long did he take to establish the COVID-19 trust fund? When he signed the bill he said it’s going to take a year to implement. Now it’s been one year three months and the president cannot even set up a board.”
 The Ningo Prampram MP narrated an instance where MP for Ashaiman, Enerstina Dogbe, was turned down when she requested some information from the Electoral Commission.
 “Recently when MP for Ashaiman, Enerstina Dogbe wrote to the EC requesting for information, they gave an excuse that they don’t know the fee and charges. If in one year and three months, they can’t name individuals to a board, for them to bring before parliament, fees, and charges, then I don’t know what they are doing,” he stated.
 He added that the president fears that some information if discovered, might go against him since it’s an election year.
 “The president is afraid that the RTI will be used to demand information in this election year and expose the rot in his government,” he established."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"2"	2020-03-17	"About 120 designated Right To Information law (RTI) officers from Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) have been trained as part of the continuous efforts to equip officers to make the implementation of the RTI successful and to ensure efficient compliance of the law by public institutions. 
The training was also meant to educate the designated officers on the RTI Act 989 so they are rightly informed on the legalities of the law and how as officers they are supposed to work within the law to absorb them from any liabilities and sanctions.
One of the key actors in the passage of the RTI bill into law, Ben Abdallah Banda who is also the MP for Offinso South and Chairman of the Legal and Constitutional Committee of Parliament took the participants through the basic understanding and interpretation of the RTI Act.
Mr Bandah informed the participants that under this RTI legal regime the law does not make room for officers to use too much discretion in handling applications and that all activities of RTI officers should strictly be within the confines of the law.
“Persons who deliberately infringe on the Right To Information law by denying access to information would be penalised” he added and urged RTI designated officers to adhere strictly to rules with respect to the RTI law to avoid being sanctioned.
Mr Bandah disclosed that Section 3 of the Right to Information Act 989, Proactive disclosure; a principle that underpins the declaration of human rights, authorises state institutions to publish some categories of information on their websites without necessarily being requested from the institution before they make available such information.
He advised the designated officers to always act within the laws when handling applications and make sure they always give responses to requests within the stipulated time.
It is the expectation of the RTI secretariat that after the training, all designated RTI officers would know how to handle applicants and their applications so they do not fall foul of the law.
Also officers would know which requests are classified as exempt under the law and the number of days officers are to work within to respond promptly to requests of applicants to absorb themselves from all legal sanctions within the laws that set up the Right To Information and above all be bold to apply the laws in all situations."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"3"	2020-02-21	"Private legal practitioner and campaigner for the passage of the Right to Information Law, Lawyer Samson Ayenini says lawyers of the Electoral Commission had no business responding to a request by Member of Parliament for Ashaiman Constituency, Ernest Norgbey, requiring information on some procurement processes undertaken by the EC.
 The Member of Parliament relying on the Right to Information Law requested details on how the EC selected its consultants for the upcoming December 7 polls.
 He demanded information on how the Commission contracted the services of Dr. Ofori-Adjei, IT Consultant and Mr. A. Akrofi, Procurement Consultant and whether the said procurement was done in accordance with Part 6 of the Public Procurement Act.
 But the EC in a response to the request through its lawyers, Amenuvor and Associates, said as ready and willing as the commission is in honouring the request, it is not able to do so because fees and charges applicable for assessing information under the RTI Law are yet to be passed by parliament.
 Reacting to this on Joy News’ PM Express, Lawyer Ayenini said though the applicant, understanding the gravity of the issue, made his request through his lawyers, lawyers of the commission had no business involving themselves in the matter.
 He said, rather, the response should have come from the commission's information officer who by law is mandated to perform such tasks.
 “If this is a situation where someone sees the information they are searching for so seriously that they use a lawyer to make the request, you have no business in using yours to be replying that request. You are required by law to have designated your information officer in your entity.”
 Describing the actions of the commission and its lawyers as shameful, Lawyer Ayenini said the EC could have shown more respect to the Member of Parliament and the taxpayer in their handling of the request.
 “This is not an ordinary member of the public, this is a Member of Parliament who is representing people in that parliament. If he makes a request for information, you have no business treating the information as if it were your personal property generated with your private funds.”
 Prior to the passage of the RTI Bill into law, a lot of critics raised concerns about the likelihood of public institutions holding on to information that were going to be requested.
 The request by the Member of Parliament for Ashaiman happens to be the first official test of the RTI since its passage in parliament on March 26, 2019, and its subsequent presidential accession on May 21, 2019.
 The law, however, became effective on January 1 this year."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"4"	2020-02-18	" Member of Parliament for Ashaiman, Ernest Norgbey, has described the Electoral Commission's failure to fully furnish him with appropriate information on its procurement process of consultants as unconstitutional.
 The Electoral Commission, through its lawyers, declined to provide the NDC MP details on how it selected its consultants for the upcoming December 7 polls, after his request.
 According to the EC, per the full remits of the law, persons who apply to be given information are liable to pay an amount of money, but the amount in question has not yet been approved by parliament.
 Thus, their inability to release the information to Ernest Norgbey.
 The Member of Parliament who didn’t seem quite pleased with the response said, in an interaction with the Citi FM that, the excuse “is a very bogus one.”
 He said; “I was requesting for information on some consultants the EC procured but unfortunately, they came with a very bogus reply that can never be found on law. That because some fees and charges had not been approved by parliament, they cannot provide me with those information.”
 Ernest Norgbey argued that the law which the EC speaks of has not been implemented, “is the law in force? With or without the RTI bill you can still go to any institution and get any information that you need. So when they’re basing their issue on the non-existence of the fees and charges, so for that reason, they cannot provide information, it just shows that they’re hiding something. They want to hide behind their technicalities and perpetuate illegalities,” he insisted.
 The Member of Parliament further hinted of a possible legal suit against the Electoral Commission, to compel them to make available in hard copy form or on a flash drive, the record of the proceedings for the said procurement."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"5"	2019-12-27	" Chale, chale, chale it is amazing 2019 is almost over already. To some, it came and went by very quickly. For others, it may have stayed a tad too long.
 Regardless what you think, the year did not go by without its fair share of odd, viral news and happenings in Ghana. Some of the issues that flooded our social media timelines and made the news were totally astounding. Let’s see what we can remember from a whirlwind 2019, which has become the very famous Year of Return.1.Loom ooo Loom
 It feels like it was so long ago when Loom hit us hard. Loom was that Whatsapp saving and sharing game where a set number of people will contribute to give the money to one person at a time. Most people predicted Loom was not going to last, and that some people will form victims. The predictions all came to pass.2. Shatta Wale and Stonebwoy marring the 20th VGMA
 Yes please, it happened this year. After what seemed like a lot of work to produce a memorable 20th anniversary of Ghana’s largest entertain event – Vodafone Ghana Music Awards, two of top stars decided to put all the hard work to naught.
 Shatta Wale decided to make his own rules by walking onto the stage unannounced with his huge entourage to ostensibly congratulate his then rival for winning the Dancehall Artists of the Year. Things went out of hand and before we could say jack, Stonebwoy had grabbed a gun to ‘protect himself’.
 Case is still in court, although it has all the signs of what we call a ‘foolish case’.3. PDS Scandal
 So the famous ECG, much loved and hated in equal measure, lost its name and powers to a new company called PDS. Ignore all the contractual and political back and forth. The takeover lasted only a few months as the government cancelled the deal and before we knew it, our dear ECG was back with us.
 4.	Cardi B, ‘Celebrities’, Khebab and a Concert that was rarely spoken of So a Nigerian company got a deal to bring Cardi B, the American rapper, to Lagos for a couple of days. They took the opportunity to add Ghana to her schedule.
 Clearly the focus of her West African trip was Nigeria and not Ghana. But she came. We know all about a supposed ‘meet and greet’ that went south. Our popular ‘celebrity’ ladies got upset and yelled disrespect. Some of them also went the entire 9 yards to prove to Cardi B that they worship her and she is the best whatever that ever happened. Oh and in all that, news about the show itself was sparse and it appears it was not eventful at all.5. New Parliamentary Chamber and National Cathedral Brouhaha
 So social media and Ghanaians in general were livid when news that Parliament was considering building a bigger, new chamber for their comfort came up. Then there was the other news of a National Cathedral. If the dropping of the news was to test the pulse of the people on these two issues, then the response was loud and crystal clear. Like most Ghana news, it all died down.6. NAM1!
 NAM1 and his Menzgold scheme was also suspicious from day one. It reminded most people about Pyram, DKM, and many other get rich quick schemes. It took the SEC a long time to use their regulatory powers, but when they did, Menzgold went under and NAM1 got ‘missing’. Then there was the issue of some money he has locked in Dubai and some plenty things. To cut a long story short, people have died out of heart attacks, people have lost money. Some have given up on getting even their principal back. Others are still hopeful.7. Adenta Footbridge
 A number of pedestrians lost their lives whiles crossing the famous Adenta-Madina road. The number of deaths varied. Regardless though, a single life lost was in itself too much. It got residents riled up and protests started. It provided one of the cutest soundbites as a Police spokesman stumbled on the world ‘helter-skelter’. Finally when some of the bridges were constructed, Ghanaians said it was too winding. A Madina Court also prosecuted some people for NOT USING the bridge.8. Western Togoland
 Some of our brothers in the Oti and Volta Regions led by an octogenarian want their own country. They have chosen a name, state emblems, and it appears they even have an army of sorts. Well, Ghana is not allowing them to do what they want. At the same time Ghana is not stopping them properly either. This is a recurring story. 2019 saw them make the biggest push yet for their ‘independence’.9. Shatta Wale and Beyoncé collaboration
 The Queen, Beyonce, gathered a number of Afropop artistes (from Africa of course) to work together on the Lion King project. Guilty Beats produced some of the beats. Some of our Naija brothers used Ghanaian words in their songs too. Perhaps the biggest news for Ghana was that the Shatta Wale collaborated with the world famous Beyonce. The song may have waned off a bit quickly but it was a good tune and Shatta and his fans naturally didn’t let us ‘hear’.10. Oswald Betting
 Chale from nowhere, Ghana Twitter uncovered a ‘betting genius’. His odds seem to be working and he saw his Whatsapp group surpassing the 256 member limit quickly. Oswald then opened a Telegram page. H has seen his Twitter following shoot up from below a thousand followers to nearly 100K. Indeed the betting community is still worshipping him. But we know how this too will end, don’t we?11. Irbad and his Addresses
 Our country of many experts had one of its ‘leading security experts’ decide to ‘address’ the nation from different locations. I am not sure what car Irbard drives, but it surely has room for his famous podium which he whisks out and stands behind to address Ghanaians like a boss.12. Shatta Bandle’s Rise to Fame
 We woke up this year to find a new celebrity. Just as Thwo Toozin, Rosemond Brown, Rasheeda Black Beauty and many others had sprung up on us, a young rich nigga millionaire going by the name Shatta Bandle emerged. He is despised and liked in equal measure but he cares less about all that. He is enjoying his fame, women and ‘money’ and has had the pleasure of featuring in a music video.13. Owusu-Bempah’s Something Something with President Mahama
 Reverend Owusu-Bempah is not very liked by NDC people. He is seen more of a friend of the NPP and Nana Addo. And this is Ghana, where if you are not for Party X, you must be for Party Y. So the two of them met a church programme and the handlers of the former President didn’t want their boss to shake the hands of one of the men they blame for his electoral defeat.14. CITI FM’s War Against Indiscipline
 This exquisite idea was brilliantly executed by CITI FM. The crew with their camera and recorders positioned themselves along roads where the indiscipline Ghanaian will always use to cut corners. In the process, they caught very important people on camera breaking rules. Some of these big people got upset over the embarrassment caused them and that has eventually led to the collapse of that huge campaign.15. Contracts for sale - CEO PPA
 The former Public Procurement Authority (PPA) boss was busted by Manasseh Awuni. He was caught selling contracts from a company that he owns. He got sacked. Sadly, he was not jailed.16. The Air Condition-loving former boss of the Ghana Maritime Authority
 The boss of the GMA was fired after he had a crazy number of ACs fixed in his official residence. Of course he defended his actions with some long English. The President was not impressed and he showed him the exit.17. Sex for Grades
 This began with what Nana Awere Damoah describes as ‘in Ghana, many issues start with the vim of boiling beans and end with the dignity of a fart’. The BBC hyped the documentary a bit. We all got excited that finally there was evidence to back what we have always known or suspected – that is, that some lecturers exchange atopa for grades. Alast when the documentary dropped, it fell short of what we expected but nonetheless put some professors in Nigeria and Ghana in big trouble. Needless to say it has put fear into the groins of those who have been doing the distin.18. Medikal x Strongman
 We witnessed one of the juiciest beefs of our rap game this year when Medikal attempted to use his weight to muzzle a certain skinny man who just happened to be strong. Needless to say Strongman won the beef but it is Medikal who has entrenched himself as a mainstream artist. Oh the beef did get out of hand a bit though. The two lads attacking their respective girlfriends for the heck of it.19.	Stonebwoy x Kelvynboy x Black Cedi
 Stonebwoy had issues with his protégées, Kelvynboy this year. To be honest I am still not even sure what the issue with them is. I do know that all our big artistes who have other artistes on their ‘labels’ are doing a poor job at it. Not sure there is anyone of them who has seen the proper ‘blow up’ of their protégées. Well, so Stonebwoy sacked his able assistant Black Cedi and then parted ways with Kelvynboy, and both made the news.
 20.	Sark BET Hip Hop Award BET introduced a new award category this year called Best International Flow. The first winner of that is our own Sarkodie. Yes, BET is not a Grammy, but it surely is an important one. Remember also that we love awards in Ghana.21.	Needless Brouhaha in Ayawaso
 The NPP MP for Ayawaso West Emmanuel Kyeremateng Agyarko sadly passed on on 21st November 2018. The EC then scheduled a by-election. It came off on 31st January. The wife (others too say ‘one of the wives’) of the late MP emerged victorious. Sadly some NDC MPs in parliamentary lost their heads and used her bereavement to mock her in the House. These ‘honourables’ and the dishonourable things they do sometimes eh.22. Ayawaso Public Hearing
 Oh we remember the famous soundbites from the public hearings as well. All the mind-blowing and mind-boggling things that we heard from the police, and other witnesses, and the famous comments by my friend Sam George about being shot at several times but miraculously still managed to have walked off unscathed. Ghana dey bee.
 23. Senior Minister's faux pas on Aisha Huang The Senior Minister, Hon. Yaw Osafo Marfo, made some very sad comments in the US about the deportation of the Galamseyer and Chinese National, Aisha Huang. The whole world was shocked at the very amusing justification we heard on the comments. “Putting [Aisha Huang] in jail in Ghana is not going to solve your money problem. It is not going to make you happy or me happy”. That was what he said.24.RTI Bill finally saw the light of day!
 After more than two decades, the Right to Information bill was passed into law. It did not look like this will ever happen, but alas it did.25. Leaked Tapes and the NDC Chairman
 We love leaked tapes, sex videos and the like in Ghana. The very latest one is from Elvis Afriyie-Ankrah. Earlier in the year was one involving the NDC Chair, Ofosu Ampofo. His ended up in court, and is still in court, and may be in court forever.26. Alleged Coup Plotting
 The alleged coup plot was busted by security apparatus and the matter is in court. It appears most people don’t think it is a serious issue but the matter is in court regardless and we all wait to see what will happen.27. Referendum Cancelled
 After all kinds of confusion and confusing debates on what a Yes vote meant and what a No vote did not mean, the President called off the referendum that was to address a matter me and you both do not quite understand yet. The Unit Committee and District Assembly elections however came off nicely.28. Law students fuo abre!
 After a mass ‘failure’ of students into the Law School, the students started a series f protest to open up legal education. Ghana Police showed up as always using a sledgehammer to kill an ant. The mater is still not solved it.29. #BringBackTaadiGirls and the HOPE CID Boss
 Sadly the girls were found dead. It had started as a lot of run around with police giving all kinds of explanations and acting really busy and making us think they were making some good headway. Their Boss told the world at a presser that they knew where the girls were and will bring them home soon. She later confessed she had no idea and she was only giving the family hope when she said what she said. Crazy stuff.30. Oh Black Stars did their thing again
 Oh yes, the Black Stars participated at the African Cup of Nations again. That’s all they have been doing since 1982 – participating in the AFCON and spending our monies.
 Folks that’s it from top of my mind. I will update as and when I remember something else. Or add up if you like."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"6"	2019-09-30	" Chairman of the Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI), Seth Abloso, has called for an independent parliament which will take up the duty of appointing ministers instead of the president nominating parliamentarians as ministers.
 Describing the recent Parliament of Ghana as incapacitated, he noted that it is important for parliament to stand alone, thereby making it not obligatory for the president in his appointment of ministers for his government.
 “I think we need an independent parliament, so far our parliament is incapacitated. Incapacitated by the provision which makes it obligatory for a president to appoint a majority of his ministers from parliament. It doesn’t make parliament stand on its own. So moving forward, that is something to look at.”
 Speaking at the launch of “Report and Documentary on the RTI journey in Ghana to mark IDUAI 2019,’ Monday, September 30, Mr Seth Abloso noted that the fight for Right to Information Bill has just begun.
 “Our task is not ended with the passage of Right to Information Bill. In fact, our responsibility towards this country becomes intense at this point.”
 He, however, laments over government’s ability to restrict the use of free air information, calling it worrisome.
 With the aim of achieving a successful passage to Right to Information Bill, he has urged Ghanaians to join in the campaign in other to reverse the stumbling block.
 “In consolidating our democracy, it’s important for us to have, free access to information and therefore it’s worrying that government ministry has initiated steps that will block free to air access to information. Which will require that all of us require decoders, which means if you don’t have decoders you can’t have access to information. It’s a campaign that needs to be supported for this situation to be reversed,” he said.Background
 After about two decades of waiting, President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo–Addo on a Tuesday gave assent to the Right to Information (RTI) Act that was passed by Parliament in March, 2019.
 The RTI Law seeks to give effect, to Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 constitution of the Republic of Ghana which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society.”
 It, also, seeks to operationalise the constitutional right to information by the public, and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent to safeguarding the public interest in a democratic state.
 The Presidential assent makes the RTI law a statute under the constitution, which provisions would empower people, contain corruption, and bringing transparency and accountability in the working of the government.
 The Minister of Information, Mr Kojo Oppong Nkrumah, moved the motion for third reading and seconded by the National Democratic Congress (NDC) Member of Parliament (MP) for Tamale Central and Ranking Member on the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament, Alhaji Inusah Fuseini.
 The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"7"	2019-09-28	"Legal practitioner and Right to Information advocate, Akoto Ampaw has cautioned government against using the creation of the Right to Information Secretariat as an excuse to fill the institution with party people.
He was speaking at a forum organised by the Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA) and the Right to Information Coalition in Accra Tuesday.
He said, “Membership of that commission is key, especially because the first members of the commission will be those who would ensure whether the institution has a proper foundation or not.
\"If we have people appointed by the President who are there simply to do the bidding of the President or the party in office, or even worse still people who are there to promote their private or sectarian or their party interest, then we have a huge problem.”
He appealed directly to the President, saying, “Appointment of the first members of the commission should not be based on ‘Job for the boys or girls’. It should be based on a commitment to the long-term interest of this country in building a democratic society.”
The renowned lawyer chastised civil society for taking their eyes off the ball as far as the appointment to this commission is concerned.
He cautioned against the centralisation of the RTI Secretariat in Accra, but then stressed the need for the right framework to be followed to ensure that there is a replication of the office in all regions and districts of the country.
He said that it would not make sense for the RTI bill to be passed only for someone who needs information in the northern sector to have to travel all the way to Accra for whatever information they may need.
Simply, he said that the RTI bill should not only be felt in Accra.
He accused unknown faces with “vested interests” of striving to scupper the successful implementation of the RTI law through “bureaucratic inertia.”
He said that the whole basis of a democratic nation is how well informed the people are of how public institutions are managing the public’s resources.
He noted that the major challenges which, if not dealt with, will lead to the RTI bill becoming a white elephant include the need to build a strong RTI architecture, which, he said, will ensure that the passage of the RTI bill will be felt nationwide.
He also advised advocates to ensure that people in the current system see how having a reliable information retrieval system will inure to their benefit. Without this, he said the current languor will be hard to eject as duty bearers fear the transparency which the passage of the RTI law affords.
He again advised the RTI advocates to continue pressing for an effective implementation of the RTI law as governments over the years have shown an aversion to the passage of the RTI bill. 
He urged them to “pay attention to how the RTI law is implemented at MMDA level”.
According to Akoto Ampaw, “There can be no doubt that the most effective way that the ordinary Ghanaian can feel and realise the dividend of the RTI law is at the district level so we need to pay attention to how the district assembly structure is configured to ensure that people who live in the district have ready access to the information created and stored in accordance with the law.”
He also advised the RTI Coalition to not rest on its laurels but to strive to bring the knowledge of the RTI bill’s implementation to the doorstep of the common man in rural Ghana.
He commended the Ministry of Information for its commitment to the passage of the RTI law. 
In a statement read on his behalf, the Minister of Information assured the gathering that “the implementation of the RTI law is on track.”
He acknowledged the delay in the implementation of the law due to funding.
He, however, said some steps have already been taken to implement the roadmap, which does not need too much financial input.
He assured that by the end of the month, they will begin the assessment and data mapping exercises to help the ministry classify the types of information which will be made available to the public."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"8"	2019-09-26	"In line with the requirements of the Right to Information (RTI) Act, government shall soon appoint a Commissioner of Information, Mr Kojo Oppong Nkrumah, the Minister of Information, has said.
He said the appointment, which would be made before the end of October, is part of the road map for the implementation of the RTI Act.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said this in a speech read on his behalf at a public forum held to deliberate on the topic: “Implementation of the RTI Law: How will Ghana’s be different?”
The forum, which was organised by the Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA), was also to mark this year’s International Day for Universal Access to Information (IDUAI), which falls on September 28.
Since 2016, UNESCO marks 28 September as the IDUAI, following the adoption of the 38 C/Resolution 57 declaring 28 September of every year as IDUAI.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said following the President’s assent to the RTI Bill, the Ministry has created a secretariat for the implementation process.
He said the Ministry has had previous engagements with stakeholders; right after the law was passed to put together an implementation road map, essentially to guide the process.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said the road map includes the assessment and classification of existing information that is already held by the various public institutions, the need to set up information units and the need to have designated information officers to service these information units.
He said there is also the need for the capacity building and training of these information officers and record officers.
“We need to deploy the requisite infrastructure and logistics to service these information units and the records officers to create a seamless retrieval process, when an application for information is put in,” Mr Oppong Nkrumah said.
He said the Ministry would soon come out with a publication of the information manual, which is vital with regards to Section 3 of the RTI Act; stating that “hopefully we can get this done by the end of the year”.
“We need to pilot the retrieval processes after the infrastructure and the logistics has been deployed to the public institutions across the country, especially with the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs).”
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said there is also the need to pilot these systems to ensure that there is a smooth retrieval process for information.
“We need to engage more with stakeholders, especially the judiciary and then we need to embark on public education to educate the public, especially on how they can assess information as laid down within the law,” he said.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said the Ministry of Finance has committed funds to facilitate the smooth implementation of the roadmap for the RTI Act.
Mr Akoto Ampaw, a renowned legal practitioner, who delivered the keynote address, appealed to the President to appoint the Commissioner for Information based on merit.
He said to avoid compromising the implementation of the RTI law, the appointment of members of the Information Commission must be devoid of politics.
“Membership of that Commission is key because, the first members of the Commission will be those who would ensure that the institution has a proper foundation. If we have people appointed by the President (to the Information Commission); who are there simply to do bidding of the President then, we going to have a huge problem.”
Madam Abigail Larbi Odei, the Programme Manager for Media, Good Governance and Democracy Programme, MFWA, said the implementation of the RTI law begins in 2020 and already there are frantic preparations to ensure a successful take-off in January.
She commended the RTI Coalition and other stakeholders for their tireless efforts.
“At the MFWA, we believe that an informed citizen is an empowered citizen. And for several years, we have implemented interventions for over 40 MMDAs that create and strengthen spaces for citizens and their local authorizes to engage and interact towards addressing critical local development issues and challenges,” she added."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"9"	2019-09-26	"In line with the requirements of the Right to Information (RTI) Act, government shall soon appoint a Commissioner of Information, Mr Kojo Oppong Nkrumah, the Minister of Information, has said.
He said the appointment, which would be made before the end of October, is part of the road map for the implementation of the RTI Act.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said this in a speech read on his behalf at a public forum held to deliberate on the topic: “Implementation of the RTI Law: How will Ghana’s be different?”
The forum, which was organised by the Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA), was also to mark this year’s International Day for Universal Access to Information (IDUAI), which falls on September 28.
Since 2016, UNESCO marks 28 September as the IDUAI, following the adoption of the 38 C/Resolution 57 declaring 28 September of every year as IDUAI.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said following the President’s assent to the RTI Bill, the Ministry has created a secretariat for the implementation process.
He said the Ministry has had previous engagements with stakeholders; right after the law was passed to put together an implementation road map, essentially to guide the process.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said the road map includes the assessment and classification of existing information that is already held by the various public institutions, the need to set up information units and the need to have designated information officers to service these information units.
He said there is also the need for the capacity building and training of these information officers and record officers.
“We need to deploy the requisite infrastructure and logistics to service these information units and the records officers to create a seamless retrieval process, when an application for information is put in,” Mr Oppong Nkrumah said.
He said the Ministry would soon come out with a publication of the information manual, which is vital with regards to Section 3 of the RTI Act; stating that “hopefully we can get this done by the end of the year”.
“We need to pilot the retrieval processes after the infrastructure and the logistics has been deployed to the public institutions across the country, especially with the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs).”
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said there is also the need to pilot these systems to ensure that there is a smooth retrieval process for information.
“We need to engage more with stakeholders, especially the judiciary and then we need to embark on public education to educate the public, especially on how they can assess information as laid down within the law,” he said.
Mr Oppong Nkrumah said the Ministry of Finance has committed funds to facilitate the smooth implementation of the roadmap for the RTI Act.
Mr Akoto Ampaw, a renowned legal practitioner, who delivered the keynote address, appealed to the President to appoint the Commissioner for Information based on merit.
He said to avoid compromising the implementation of the RTI law, the appointment of members of the Information Commission must be devoid of politics.
“Membership of that Commission is key because, the first members of the Commission will be those who would ensure that the institution has a proper foundation. If we have people appointed by the President (to the Information Commission); who are there simply to do bidding of the President then, we going to have a huge problem.”
Madam Abigail Larbi Odei, the Programme Manager for Media, Good Governance and Democracy Programme, MFWA, said the implementation of the RTI law begins in 2020 and already there are frantic preparations to ensure a successful take-off in January.
She commended the RTI Coalition and other stakeholders for their tireless efforts.
“At the MFWA, we believe that an informed citizen is an empowered citizen. And for several years, we have implemented interventions for over 40 MMDAs that create and strengthen spaces for citizens and their local authorizes to engage and interact towards addressing critical local development issues and challenges,” she added."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"10"	2019-09-24	"Renowned legal practitioner, Akoto Ampaw has cautioned President Akufo-Addo not to treat the appointment of members of the Right to Information (RTI) commission as “job for the boys”. 
According to him appointing the members based on political merit will compromise the implementation of the law. 
He added that the proper consideration of appointees of the RTI commission is important since their performance will determine if the institution will have a proper foundation or not. 
Speaking at public forum on the theme implementation of Right to Information bill, Akoto Ampaw identified some challenges in the RTI law which will be implemented in 2020. 
He said government must be ready to govern with transparency and the appointment of member of the RTI commission shouldn’t be based on political merits. 
“…membership of that commission is key especially because, the first members of the commission will be those who would ensure whether the institution has a proper foundation or not. If we have people appointed by the president who are there simply to do bidding of the president then we going to have a huge problem.” 
“I want to appeal to the president of the country that appointment of first members of  the commission should not be based on jobs for the boys or girls. It should be based on commitment to the long-term interest of this country in building a democratic society” he added 
The parliament of Ghana finally passed the RTI bill into law in March 2019. 
The RTI which will be implemented in January 2020 seeks to provide constitutional right to information held by the public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society. 
It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and to provide for related matters."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"11"	2019-09-11	"A former Commissioner on Human Rights and Administrative Justice, Mr Francis Emile Short, has observed that legislators feel their own anti-corruption laws could haunt them, hence their non-commitment in passing such legislation.
Highlighting the importance of political will in tackling corruption, Mr Short cited an example where political expediency caused a near-two-decade delay in the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
In his opinion, legislators and other political stakeholders fear they will be caught by their own laws, thus, the lack of commitment to passing them.
He told Kwabena Bobie Ansah on Accra100.5FM’s ‘The Citizen’ show in a one-on-one interview that: “It is because parliament is aware of the important role that such a legislation will play in the fight against corruption [in the case of the RTI Bill] and I believe that Members of Parliament, sometimes, see themselves as possible victims of such [anti-corruption] legislation”.
The former judge stated that: “Corruption [is] not a perception, it is a reality”, adding that: “I would say that in Ghana, and in most parts of Africa, corruption is a norm, it is accepted as a norm, as the way of life” contrary to what is witnessed in developed countries.
Mr Short expressed concern that “in our society, if you are not corrupt, you are considered to be the exception and I think we have to move from that position”.
He called for effective collaboration between the legislature, judiciary, and the executive to deal with the canker due to the billions of cedis the country loses as a result, which, in turn, stifles economic development, infrastructure expansion, provision of health facilities and many other interventions. 
For him, there is a “lack of enforcement of laws and regulations”, a situation he believes calls for greater awareness about the repercussions of corruption to the economy and the deprivation of facilities and services to the public.
Mr Short subsequently proposed stiffer sanctions for culpable individuals to serve as an effective deterrent.
“There is a need for greater sanctions to be imposed on those who indulge in corruption. There is a need for greater effectiveness of the anti-corruption agencies. There is a need for anti-corruption legislation, which I don’t think parliament has addressed sufficiently,” he observed.
He said the country’s political system encourages corruption and abuse of office. “The way we practice our politics fuels corruption”.
To buttress his point, he noted that: “It should not require too much money for anybody who wants to be elected into political office but what we see today is monetisation of politics”.
This, he said, compels elected officials to use corrupt means to recoup their expenditure."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"12"	2019-09-11	" The General Secretary of the New Patriotic Party (NPP), John Boadu, has cautioned the Ghanaian media to disengage themselves from any activity of the National Democratic Congress (NDC).
 According to him, the NDC had no respect and was not media-friendly when they were in power.
 “I was amazed when the General Secretary of the NDC tried to lure you the media to let you believe that they are the friends of the media. We have been in this country, they have even gone ahead and shit bombed most media houses that were against them. They criminalized your speeches a lot, some of you went to jail for a very long time, don’t be deceived by lions in sheep clothing at all”, he said.
 He gave this advice on Wednesday, September 11, 2019, at a press conference at the Party's headquarters, Accra.
 The presser was in response to the NDC's Press Conference that sought to downplay President Akufo-Addo and his government’s efforts in the fight against corruption.
 Mr Boadu labeled Akufo-Addo as “fearless” for “courageously” forn passing the Right to Information (RTI) Bill after NDC failed to do so.
 “17 years in the making and this law has now been signed by the fearless and courageous Nana Akufo-Addo. I remember as far back as 2008 the now Minority leader was at the neck of the NPP, forcing the government to pass the law, they were in power for 8years we came to meet the law as it is\" he said.
 The Bill was passed in March 2019 following the completion of its consideration stage after several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the floor of the House. About RTI 
 The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
 The bill as it has been drafted is to give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society.” The back and forth 
 The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999 under former President, Jerry John Rawlings.
 Various advocacy groups emerged to press for the immediate passing of the bill into law in 2002 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007.
 The National Democratic Congress (NDC) in its 2008 and 2012 election manifestos promised to ensure the Bill was passed. In 2010, it was presented to Parliament for consideration.
 In 2011, the government signed unto the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative with a commitment to pass the law. In November 2013, the Bill was formally laid before Parliament.
 Former Attorney General, Deputy Dominic Ayine in 2015, moved the Bill for second reading in Parliament. In October 2016, the Bill was withdrawn and replaced with a new one which was immediately laid.
 Following the dissolution of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic and the swearing-in of new Parliament in January 2017, the Bill had to be re-laid by the new government before work commences on it. That was done and the bill has been receiving attention by the house but not without pressure from CSOs to expedite action on it."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"13"	2019-07-29	" The Coalition on the Right to Information, Ghana (RTI Coalition), has presented Citations of Honour to former Steering Committee members, some key supporters and institutions who have played significant roles over the years in getting Ghana’s RTI bill passed into law.
 The awardees included former Steering Committee members of the Coalition Professor Kwame Karikari, Mr Akoto Ampaw, Mr Vitus Azeem, Nana Oye Lithur, Mrs Jeanette Quarcoopome and Alhaji Abdulai Alhassan.
 The rest were Mrs Bernice Sam, who was the first person to head the Africa Office of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI); Hon. Alban S.K. Bagbin, the 2nd Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Mr Maxwell Kadiri of the Open Society for Justice Initiative, Nigeria; and the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) Ghana for drafting the first CSOs paper on the RTI bill for the country.
 The awards were presented to them at a well-attended Civil Society Stakeholder’s Forum on the Right to Information Act, 2019 (Act 989) at the Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences, Accra on Tuesday, 23rd July 2019 organised by the Coalition’s Secretariat with support from  the Open Society Foundation for West Africa (OSIWA).
 The stakeholder forum was meant to increase understanding of the RTI Law and its implication on governance in general amongst members of the Coalition and other stakeholders’, highlight some implementation challenges encountered on the African continent and the way forward, and to express appreciation to all for the continued support throughout the process. It brought together representatives from the Coalition based in Accra including both the former and current steering committee members of the Coalition, the Media Coalition and other organisations that supported the advocacy for the passage of the RTI law.
 Presenting the Citations of Honour to the recipients, Madam Mina Mensah, the Head of the CHRI’s Africa Office, highly commended the Coalition members including the current Steering Committee chaired by Mr Seth Abloso, the Media Coalition on RTI, the Trades Union Congress (TUC), the Christian Council, the Muslim Council and all the other organisations for the sterling job they have done over the years to make it possible for the law to be passed.
 The forum was divided into different sessions and it included expert presentations, a panel discussion on the Implication of the Act to Good Governance and Transparency, and a Question and Answer session.
 Presenting an overview of the RTI Act, Mr Akoto Ampaw, a private legal practitioner, said that the law is a good one and is a victory for democracy. He called for the Ghanaian citizenry to be educated on the law since sovereignty resides in the people of Ghana. Mr Ampaw encouraged the Coalition to pay diligent attention to the crafting of the Legislative
 An instrument that will help elaborate on the provisions of Act 989.
 Additionally, he recommended that appointments to the yet to be established RTI Commission should be transparent and based on competence and the Commission must be supported with the requisite infrastructure to work.
 The panel discussion was made up of Professor Kwame Karikari, Nana Oye Lithur, Mr Akoto Ampaw and Dr Kojo Asante. The panellists were happy with the passage of the RTI law and agreed that it needs to be translated into local languages for the ordinary Ghanaian in the village to understand so that the law will be meaningful in the lives of the ordinary people. The point was also made that the Coalition’s work is just starting and so the Coalition members must not rest on their oars.
 Mr Maxwell Kadiri shared experiences from other African countries such as Nigeria, Liberia, Uganda, Angola on how they implemented their RTI law. He said although Ghana was passing its RTI law late, it affords a good opportunity for the country to learn from the experiences and mistakes of fellow African countries that already have the law. He said the Coalition must take charge of the process and not leave it in the hands of the political elite. Citing various examples from the continent to back his point, he advised the Coalition to build strong partnerships with the Judiciary, Parliament and other professional bodies to make the law successful.
 The RTI Law was assented to by the President of Ghana in May this year. The law seeks to give effect to Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution of the Republic of Ghana which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society.”"	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"14"	2019-07-22	" Mr Akoto Ampaw, a leading member of the Ghana Right to Information Coalition, has lauded the First and Second Deputy Speakers of Parliament, Mr Alban Bagbin and Joseph Osei-Owusu (Joe-Wise), respectively, for the roles they played in ensuring the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law.
 The Members of Parliament for Nadowli/Kaleo and Ashanti Bekwai constituencies, respectively, according to Mr Ampaw, supported the need for what he described as a truly empowering RTI Law that is consistent with the 1992 Constitution.
 “They embraced the need to have a truly democratic and empowering Right to Information law that opens up the governance space for the people, which is consistent with the First Article of our Constitution: ‘The Sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of Ghana, in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of government are to be exercised in the manner and within the limits laid down in this Constitution’,” he said while speaking at a Civil Society Stakeholders Forum on the RTI Act 2019 (ACT 989) organised by the Coalition with support from the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiatives (CHRI) and OSIWA in Accra on Tuesday, 23 July 2019.
 Mr Ampaw also noted that there was a need to keep an eye on the implementation of the Act to ensure that the right things are done by the authorities.
 “We need to ensure that the people with the right competencies are recruited to manage the information and also release the information,” he said.
 “People who are recruited should not be people who will serve the political interest of their parties,” he added.
 Mr Ampaw, also a private legal practitioner, told the gathering that the Information Minister has been engaging the coalition and other stakeholders on plans to implement the law in 2020.
 Regarding Mr Nkrumah’s commitment to ensure effective implementation of the law, Mr Ampaw said: “The Minister of Information has been ensuring that by 2020, we are ready, we are ready to go.
 “Some people will wait till 2020 before starting preparations with the implementation but he has bought into the idea that we start preparations now.
 “The programmes he has set out for the implementation are quite ambitious but let us see how it goes because public institutions have a way of stifling genuine initiatives.”
 In March 2019, Ghana’s legislature passed the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law.
 The Bill was passed after several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the floor of parliament.
 The RTI Bill had been in Parliament for close to two decades despite calls from the media and civil society groups for its passage.
 The governing New Patriotic Party (NPP) promised during the 2016 election campaign to pass it if it won power."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"15"	2019-07-22	" A member of the Coalition on the Right to Information Law, Mr Akoto Ampaw, has noted that the Minister of Information Kojo Oppong Nkrumah has commenced preparations towards the implementation of the Right to Information Act (ACT 989).
 However, he said, Mr Nkrumah's plans are ambitious and face possible threats because “public institutions have a way of stifling genuine initiatives.”
 Speaking at a Civil Society Stakeholders Forum on the RTI Act 2019 (ACT 989) organised by the Coalition with support from the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiatives (CHRI) and OSIWA, in Accra on Tuesday, 23 July 2019, Mr Ampaw asked stakeholders to pay attention to the legislation that will be drafted by the government as part of the implementation of the RTI Act beginning 2020.
 He said there was the need to ensure that the legislation that will be introduced do not hamper smooth access to information in the country.
 Mr Ampaw noted that there was the need to keep an eye on the implementation of the Act to ensure that the right things are done by authorities in charge of its implementation.
 “We need to ensure that the people with the right competencies are recruited to manage the information and also release the information,” he said.
 “People who are recruited should not be people who will serve the political interest of their parties,” he added.
 Mr Ampaw, also a private legal practitioner told the gathering that the current Minister for Information, Kojo Oppong Nkrumah, has been engaging the coalition and other stakeholders on plans to implement the law in 2020.
 Regarding Mr Nkrumah’s commitment to ensure effective implementation of the law, Mr Ampaw said: “The Minister for Information has been ensuring that by 2020 we are ready, we are ready to go.
 “Some people will wait till 2020 before starting preparations with the implementation but he has bought into the idea that we start preparations now.
 “The programmes he has set out for the implementation are quite ambitious but let us see how it goes because public institutions have a way of stifling genuine initiatives.”
 In March 2019, Ghana’s legislature passed the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law.
 The Bill was passed after several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the Floor of the House.
 The RTI Bill had been in Parliament for close to two decades despite calls from the media and civil society groups for its passage.
 The governing New Patriotic Party (NPP) promised during the 2016 election campaign to pass the Bill if it won power."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"16"	2019-06-14	"Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia has expressed confidence in the newly established office of the Special Prosecutor stressing that it is working effectively and Ghanaians will soon witness some of his works.
 According to the Vice President, the Special Prosecutor, Martin Amidu and his team will need more time as the institution is a newly established institution after 60 years of independence.
 Speaking at the maiden public lecture organised by Occupy Ghana and Audit Service to commemorate the landmark judgment by the Supreme Court in a case between Occupy Ghana versus Attorney-General, Dr Bawumia indicated that government has a lot of confidence in the special prosecutor which will save the country’s public purse.
 “…This is an institution that is very very needed and it is not an institution just can just stand up and start off the blocks but he is taking his time putting his team together and we are beginning to see him moving and it is an institution not for today but for today and tomorrow”
 “We’ve not had it for 60 years after independence and we are now putting in this major institution together and which we have a lot of confidence in the Special Prosecutor and I believe that Ghanaians and the public purse will be a major beneficiary of the work of the Special prosecutor going forward”
 He added the passing of the RTI bill into law will stand the test of time and Ghanaians will see it in action.
 Dr. Mahamaudu Bawumia also stated that 21 persons were undergoing trial for misappropriation of public funds and assured of government’s commitment to supporting such prosecutions no matter the political affiliation of those persons.
 The law must take its course in matters of misappropriation of public funds, he said, and called for effective collaboration between anti-graft institutions such as the Economic and Organised Crime Office, Financial Intelligence Unit, Criminal Investigations Department of the Police Service, civil society and Ghanaians to provide relevant information and clues to protect public purse."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"17"	2019-05-26	"Ghana’s Right To Information Coalition has extolled President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo for swiftly signing the Right To Information (RTI) bill into law.
The Coalition, in a statement, commended the President for the importance he attached to the bill, saying: “The Coalition recognizes and commends the urgency with which His Excellency Nana Akufo-Addo signed the law in keeping with the assurance he gave at the last state of the nation address that as soon as the law is presented to him, he would give his assent to it. We do hope that this same urgency will be accorded to the implementation of the law.”
Mr. Akufo-Addo on Tuesday, 21 May 2019 assented to the bill, as approved by Ghana’s parliament. The law will be operational next year.
“The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) Ghana is delighted with the presidential assent given to the Right to Information Act on Tuesday, May 21, 2019, by President Nana Akufo-Addo. The assent brings to a close a two-decade journey for legislation to operationalize the constitutional right to information held by public institutions.
“The Coalition recognizes and commends the urgency with which His Excellency Nana Akufo-Addo signed the law in keeping with the assurance he gave at the last state of the nation address that as soon as the law is presented to him he would give his assent to it. We do hope that this same urgency will be accorded to the implementation of the law.
“We share in the President’s view that the law will foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs, and will, in turn, enhance the quality of governance of our country as it serves as a critical tool in the fight against corruption.”
The statement further stated that: “We, however, wish to emphasize that we still have a long way to go in realizing these benefits. The law only stands to benefit the good people of Ghana with the establishment of the following necessary preconditions as the Coalition has already communicated:
1.	an effective and efficient right to information infrastructure and culture that will ensure substantial pro-active disclosure by public institutions and relevant bodies;
2.	the drafting and passage of the critical regulations which will give full life to the law;
3.	the designation of information officers and their training, which are key conditions for the realization of a truly robust and effective right to information law;
4.	the criteria that are taken into consideration when appointing members of the Information Commission, which should include a proven track record of commitment and defense of human rights, understanding of, and empathy with international norms and best practices in the right to information regime;
5.	effective mass education of the population on the provisions of the law and their rights under the law; 
6.	the provisions of necessary resources, including funding, to make the law work.
“Now that the law has been assented to by the President, we call on the government to put in place all needed processes, especially the critical and necessary funding and infrastructure to ensure that the new law commences operation at the start of the next financial year. It is, however, necessary that provision be made in the mid-term budget for funding to begin setting up the basic infrastructure and recruiting of the human resource necessary for the implementation of the law. We are, therefore, calling on His Excellency to give the necessary directives to the relevant authorities to ensure that some funding is procured in the mid-term budget to commence implementation now.\"
“We wish to assure the nation that the works of the RTI Coalition and partners has only just begun, as we are putting in place appropriate measures to advocate consistently for the effective and efficient implementation of the law.”"	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"18"	2019-05-24	"President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, has been commended for giving Presidential assent to the Right to Information law, which was recently passed by Parliament under his tenure of office.
Reverend Dr Kwabena Opuni-Frimpong, a former General Secretary of the Christian Council of Ghana, and a Lecturer at the Department of Religious Studies, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi, on Friday said the President deserved “congratulations for having this long journey coming to an end under his leadership”.
He has however cautioned that the zeal and enthusiasm that brought the RTI bill into law must not die with the giving of Presidential assent to the bill, adding that the law must become a household concept through intensified public education. 
Speaking in an interview with the Ghana News Agency, Rev Opuni-Frimpong said the passing of the RTI law “is indeed a victory for Democracy in Ghana. The law is a clear demonstration of what a determined and purposeful people can achieve in the midst of delays, frustrations and attacks”.
He expressed his happiness that the Right to Information Bill (RTI) that was drafted in 1999, after going through several reviews over the years was finally given Presidential assent by the President. 
The RTI law, which would be operationlised in 2020, would enable citizens to hold governments accountable, to ensure that there was a high level of transparency in the governance of the country through having access to relevant information.
Rev Opuni-Frimpong acknowledged the many Civil Society Organisations, Media Houses, Members of Parliament, Donor Organisations, Faith Based Leaders and many more who identified themselves with the process of getting the Bill passed into law and signed by the President.
He said such entities and people, whether “dead or alive, truly ‘defended forever the cause of freedom and of right, and must be celebrated as dedicated sons and daughters of Ghana”.
He said by that law, Ghana now joined other African countries like South Africa, Angola, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Liberia, and Guinea that had already adopted such law. 
He urged churches, mosques, academic institutions and the media to provide “oxygen to the new law for it to offer us transparency, accountability, and good governance”.
The campaign for the effective implementation of the RTI law must start now, Rev Opuni-Frimpong stated."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"19"	2019-05-22	"The Member of Parliament for Tamale Central, Inusah Fuseini has underscored the need for Ghanaians to precise the efforts by all stakeholders in ensuring the passage of the Right to Information Bill (RTI).
The legislator says although the passage of the RTI was done under President Akufo-Addo, he should not take all the glory for the passage.
He told Kwabena Agyapong on Rainbow Radio 87.5Fm that since 1999, the RTI has been championed by some major players till its passage especially the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA).
He is, therefore, asking Ghanaians to be mindful of the efforts by all these persons and organizations and appreciate them for that.
Mr. Fuseini said the bill help Ghanaians have access to information from any of our state institutions.
He stressed Ghanaians can access information from all government institutions including the Jubilee House and private institutions using state resources.
President Nana Akufo-Addo on Tuesday, 21st May 2019, gave assent to Right to Information Act, at a brief event at Jubilee House, the seat of the nation’s presidency.
In his remarks, before giving assent to the Act, President Akufo-Addo expressed his satisfaction that the passing of the Act came into effect during his time as President, and in the time of the 7th Parliament.
“I want to congratulate the 7th Parliament for its courage, sense of responsibility and commitment to good governance in passing this significant piece of legislation,” the President added.
The purposes of the Act, as set out in its Preamble, is to provide for the implementation of the constitutional right to information held by any public institution, and to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs.
This, in the view, of President “should enhance the quality of governance of our country, and provide a critical tool in the fight against corruption in public life.”
With Parliament having provided that Act comes into effect in the next financial year, i.e. January 2020, because of the financial consequences in the implementation of the law, the President stated that this is to give the public treasury the opportunity to make the necessary allocations to enable the Act to be effective.
“I am very happy that this law has finally been passed, and I did make the commitment that, when it was brought to me, I would give my assent to it right away. It was, in fact, brought to me yesterday afternoon,” the President said.
He continued, “But, on second thought, I felt that I should sign it in the plain view of the Ghanaian people, for you to know that this long-winding parliamentary process has finally come to an end.”
The first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010. Government came under massive pressure to get the bill laid following fears that government was deliberately delaying the process."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"20"	2019-05-20	"President Nana Addo Dakwa Akufo-Addo has assented to the Right To Information (RTI) Bill which was approved by Parliament on 26 March 2019.
Mr Akufo-Addo signed the Bill at the seat of government, the Jubilee House in Accra on Tuesday, 21 May 2019.
The RTI Bill stayed in Ghana’s Parliament for close to two decades despite calls from the media and civil society groups for its passage.
The governing New Patriotic Party (NPP) promised during the 2016 election campaign to pass the Bill into law if they were voted for.
The NPP government has since been under pressure from civil society groups and the media to pass the Bill into law."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"21"	2019-05-20	"President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo has assented to the landmark Right to Information (RTI) Act that is expected to be the game-changer in the country’s governance, particularly with respect to information flow.
While the passage of the Act was hailed by many, particularly civil society groups and media professionals, the government announced a deferment of its implementation until January next year due to financial constraints.
The Act was passed by parliament on March 26 after almost two decades of back and forth that saw it move in and out of parliament to enable several policy changes and amendments to be done.
Ahead of its passage, Nana Akufo-Addo promised to assent to the Act once it was passed and tabled before his desk in a move to demonstrate his commitment to the Act.
According to the President, the Act was brought to his office on May 20 and “ I felt that I should sign it in the plain view of the Ghanaian people, for you to know that this long-winding parliamentary process has finally come to an end.”
In a short remark to assent to the Act at the Flagstaff House in Accra Tuesday, Nana Akufo-Addo said the implementation of the law will boost the country’s good governance and the fight against graft.
Nana Akufo-Addo signing the Act which was taken to his office on May 21, 2019
“Properly applied, it will enhance the quality of our governance in the country and provide the critical tool in the fight against corruption in the next financial year i.e January 2020,” he assured the people of Ghana.
He said he was “very happy that this law has finally been passed” after exhaustive parliamentary processes.
“I want to congratulate the 7th Parliament for its courage, sense of responsibility and commitment to good governance in passing this significant piece of legislation,” the President added.
Nana Akufo-Addo explained the decision to defer implementation to January 2020 was to give the public treasury the opportunity to make the necessary allocations to enable the Act to be effective.
The object of the RTI Bill is to provide for the operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society.
It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and to provide for related matters.
The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010. It was brought back to the Sixth Parliament but could not be passed till the expiration of that Parliament on January 6, 2016.
After months of waiting, the Bill was laid in Parliament early last year (2018) by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Mr Joseph Dindiok.
On Thursday March 21, the Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Mike Oquaye ordered the removal of the RTI bill from parliament’s motion paper after a planned reading of the bill for the third time.
This was to enable Civil Society Organisations’ decision to make additional proposals to be inserted into the bill.
After the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament had supposedly fine-tuned the Bill with stakeholders, it was finally laid before the House to go through the third reading on March 26.
Attracting less controversy from Majority and Minority MPs, the Bill was finally passed."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"22"	2019-04-16	"The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) bill has underscored the need for government to direct the various public institutions to put their records in order for easy implementation of the policy.
The Coalition is of the view that the move will
be a major step to making sure that the law is well enforced when it comes into effect in 2020.
This came to bear at a press conference held by the group yesterday (Tuesday).
The group has also tasked the public institutions to put its affairs in order, prior to the law being enforced next year.
Addressing the media a a member of the coalition’s steering committee, Lawyer Akoto Ampaw said: “While we have every reason to celebrate this important victory of democracy, transparency and accountability, it has to be emphasized that we still have a long way to go in establishing the following necessary prerequisite for the efficacy of the law in practice when it receives presidential assent.”
An effective and efficient right to information infrastructure and culture that will ensure substantial proactive disclosure in public institutions and relevant private bodies.
2 The drafting and passing into law of the critical regulations that will give full life to the law
3. The designation of information offices and their training which are key conditions for the realization of a truly robust and right to information law.These are the issues we expect the media to be monitoring
About RTI
The RTI is supposed to be a fundamental human right guaranteed by the Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The passage of the Bill gives substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society.”
The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999 under former President, Jerry John Rawlings.
The National Democratic Congress (NDC) in its 2008 and 2012 election manifestos promised to ensure the Bill was passed. In 2010, it was presented to Parliament for consideration.
In 2011, the government signed unto the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative with a commitment to pass the law. In November 2013, the Bill was formally laid before Parliament.
Former Attorney General, Deputy Dominic Ayine in 2015, moved the Bill for second reading in Parliament. In October 2016, the Bill was withdrawn and replaced with a new one which was immediately laid.
Following the dissolution of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic and the swearing-in of new Parliament in January 2017, the Bill had to be re-laid by the new government before work commences on it."	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"23"	2019-04-15	"The Coalition on the Right To Information, Ghana has urged the president to appoint only persons who have proven records of commitment and defense of human rights to the RTI Commission.  
They cautioned against the appointment of ‘ignorant’ persons unto the Commission which is expected to oversee the implementation of the Right to Information law. 
 Speaking at a press conference in Accra, a member of the coalition, Akoto Ampaw stated that “we don’t want any party activist K3k3, whether the person is a party activist or non-party activist, the person must have a proven record of commitment and defense of human rights”.   
“We don’t want any ignoramus to be appointed as commissioner Mr. President. We don’t want the person doesn’t know the job to be appointed as commissioner,” he added.  
The Coalition also called for an ‘effective mass education’ of the population on the provisions of the law and their rights under the law whilst adding that there should be a provision of the necessary resources, such as funding, to make the law work.  
 The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010. But it could not be passed due to the many recommendations of amendment. It was brought back to the Sixth Parliament but could not be passed till the expiration of that Parliament on January 6, 2016.  
Momentum to get the bill passed swelled in 2017 following the formation of the Media Coalition on RTI. The Coalition with support from other civil society organisations in the past 11 months, piled pressure on Parliament to get the Bill passed.  "	20	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1
"24"	2019-04-03	" I am compelled to write to you this letter to express my opinion on your performance as our representative in parliament, to assess you of your actions and reflect on the current state of our constituency.
 I am a Ghanaian, a resident of Atwedie in the Asante Akyem South Municipality, and I have interest in the affairs of our dear constituency. I am writing this letter based on the powers that enshrined in our constitution to give every citizen the freedom of speech and expression.
 Also, the principle of participatory democracy necessitates that citizens hold their political leaders accountable in relation to their performance. This is basically the reason why I am writing this open letter, outlining my reason for disquietude, which majority of the electorates in the constituency are also concern with.
 I appreciate your reserved nature as well as the little development you brought to Asante Akyem South together with the MCE but I think it is not enough per what was given to by your people and what you’ve delivered.
 There is a saying that “to him much is given much is expected from him” and so you can do better. I am in-computably disappointed by your performance as Member of Parliament which I find very appalling because you have shown little interest in addressing your constituent and their needs.
 If I am to rate you, I would rate you under 35% score mark which automatically earns you an E and could have given you the chance to re-sit but it is fortunate on your part to have decided not to run for the third time and it is also unfortunate on our part not to give you the chance to run for the third time even if you had that in mind which you do not.
 I am aware that the President, Nana Addo Dankwa Akuffo-Addo is delivering on his promises such as the Free SHS, Planting for Food And Jobs, One District-One Factory, NABCO, exiting from the IMF, passing of the RTI Bill into RTI Act and a lot to be mentioned but as an MP you are not making the good intentions of our President known in the Constituency.
 Your colleague MP’s are taking the advantage of these social intervention programs to help develop their constituencies and you are just quiet sitting down with your two hands in between your legs to the detriment of your people. They trusted and knew you cannot deceive them and as such voted in their numbers for you. It is not surprising that for barely 7 years now, they’ve not seen you doing much to champion the course you promised them.
 Hon. Asante-Boateng, if you care to know, many of the people in Asante Akyem South constituency are not interested in political gimmicks but rather the struggle to get rid of poverty, bad roads, poor educational facilities, limited health care centers, the lack of developmental policies in the constituency is their topmost priority.
 Programs designed by the President to help improve livelihoods of the good people of Ghana has been the priority of most of your colleague MPs some of which are even in opposition and you sit aloof, unconcerned about this worrying state of the constituency. Where is your lobbying skills? Asante Akyem South is one of the faithful constituencies NPP had always relied on during elections and I think we deserve better Mr. MP. Your reluctant nature to respond to genuine concerns raised by your people is what has compelled me to write to you this letter openly.
 Furthermore, I am particularly concerned about the lack of involvement of the people from the constituency in the formulation of the district development plan.
 In my humble opinion, these developmental plans must not be only the duty of the assembly but rather must be democratized to reflect a bottom-up policy approach where residents in the various towns of the constituency can contribute their quota to the process so that the challenges and the aspirations of the people of Asante Akyem South will be represented in those plans.
 I don’t think the assembly would have drawn a policy in our four year development plan that they will get rid of public toilets in our district if there was proper consultation. Because I don’t see why the district assembly will come up with such policies in our development plan. Where do you expect visitors of the constituency or the district to ease themselves? Do we really know the importance of a public toilet? Advance countries have public toilets. Is that why most of the communities in our constituency do not have a public toilet which they have therefore resorted to the bush defecating in discriminatively in our constituency. The MP must sit up even if he will not bid for a third term.
 I have much to tell you about the poor state of affairs of the constituency. You are not visible in the constituency or vocal in the House of Parliament. You don’t participate in Parliamentary debates neither do you forward the problems of your constituency to the House of Parliament.
 You need to actually wake up from your slumber though the president is working hard to bring unprecedented development to this country. We cannot be coming up with write ups that suggest the way forward for our beloved constituency to realize that it does not mean anything to our MP. We are both aware that the problems of our constituency will need the whole earth space to write it down. This should tell you that you have not done much as you promised and must come and apologize to us and if possible step down before 2020 elections which we both know once again that you will not run again.
 Thank you.
 Yours Sincerely,
 Ampem Nketiah Wereko
 A true Son of Asante Akyem South
 ampembarimah@gamil.com
 0504-680-753"	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"25"	2019-03-30	"Government intends to explore more funding options to ensure that the Right to Information (RTI) bill is effectively resourced before it fully takes off next year, Minister for Information Kojo Oppong Nkrumah has said.
After two decades in the works, Parliament on Tuesday, March 26, 2019 passed the Right to Information bill (RTI) into law – and government is already preparing a road map for implementing the RTI law.
“Government is committed to putting portions of the national resource envelope that is available to facilitate this law at the disposal of agencies responsible for its implementation. This law, admittedly, requires a lot of significant resources; and l am sure when it gets to budget 2020, we will explore how to ensure the funding is not a one-off but regular, so that we can all get the benefits of it,” Mr. Oppong Nkrumah told B&FT in an interview after passage of the bill.
Following its passage, the bill will now be forwarded to the president for assent before it finally becomes a law.
The next step is moving toward implementation – particularly behind the scenes infrastructure, so by the time the next financial year comes around, as the current law says, government will be ready to see to it fully, the minister noted.
Prior to the passage, Minority leader Haruna Iddrisu advised government to provide a budgetary allocation for the RTI office, and added that he has no doubt it will enrich the country’s efforts to combat corruption and hold public officers accountable.
Among requirements of the RTI law is establishment of the RTI Commission, as well as the recruitment and training of information officers to manage RTI units across the country. There also has to be completion of various administrative protocols before start of the next fiscal year.
Mr. Oppong Nkrumah further explained that government is working between now and half-year (June) to tidy up the roadmap for implementation and get the necessary Cabinet approval, and then use the second half of the year to do all of the background work. So that by the start of next financial year, as the bill says, it is ready to be implemented.
The bill in its current form is sufficient to meet the tenets of Article 21(f).
The law provides for operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society.
It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs, and to provide for related matters.
The RTI bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 – but was only presented to Parliament in 2010."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"26"	2019-03-30	" The National Commission for Civic Education (NCCE) has praised Parliament for its efforts in passing the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law.
 The Commission said it was happy that the Bill had finally been passed after two decades and, therefore, congratulated the Seventh  Parliament of the Fourth Republic for the Law.
 A press release signed by Madam Joyce Affutu, the Director of Public Affairs, NCCE, and copied to the Ghana News Agency, commended all Civil Society Organisations and the media for their strategic role in persistently advocating for the passage of the Bill.
 The statement quoted Article 21(1)(f) of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana, which states that ‘all persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.
 Madam Affutu said the NCCE was of the view that the passage of the RTI Bill into law would further enhance public accountability and citizens’ responsiveness to issues of national concern whilst improving transparency as a hallmark of true democracy.
 She noted that the NCCE would continue to embark on Anti-Corruption, Rule of Law, and Accountability Programmes (ARAP), and encouraged Ghanaians to take full advantage of the Law to collectively fight corruption in Ghana and demand accountability from duty bearers. “We urge Parliament to expedite the passage of the Legislative Instrument to the RTI Law to make it functional,” she added."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"27"	2019-03-30	" The passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law would go a long way to help the Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) actualise its vision of ensuring accountability, good governance and transparency.
 Mr Tetteh Tuwor, Central Regional Director of CHRAJ, in an interview with the Ghana News Agency (GNA), expressed delight at the passage of the Bill and said Ghanaians would have no excuse not to seek for information.
 Parliament on Tuesday March 26, 2018 passed the Right RTI Bill into law to grant Ghanaians access to information to public information and to serve as an incentive to the fight against corruption in Ghana.
 The RTI law is expected to provide guidelines for the operationalisation of the guaranteed constitutional rights to information held by the public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society.
 “Governance should be transparent, the rule of law and other forms of government structures that exist must be transparent to the citizenry. So the passage of the RTI is good for us all because it will help people to enjoy their rights,” Mr Tuwor said.
 He said though some sections of the public especially, the media might be dissatisfied with some provisions and articles in the RTI Bill, it passage was a step towards creating the enabling environment to fight corruption and must be accepted.
 “It is good that they have pass it. Half a loaf is better than none, let us use and implement it. When there are challenges, we will talk about it and see how they can amend it,” he said
 Mr Tuwor called on Ghanaians to support and make adequate use of the RTI law adding that, every amendment or new policies were without challenges but they would be addressed as and when they arise.
 The RTI, he said must not be seen as something that would only benefit the media but the general public.
 In this regard, he called on the general public to strive to know their rights and responsibilities under the law and ensure its compliance.
 “We now have the power to request for document such as contract documents but we need to understand what the law says so as to know our rights, responsibilities” he added."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"28"	2019-03-28	"Member of RTI Coalition, Samson Lardy Anyenini talk BBC Pidgin say \"passage of de Right to Information Bill to law be one thing, but effective den faithful implementation be another, I fit talk say we get long way to go.\"
\"We no for take am easy, we for make sure say de menerz wey for ensure say dem go implement am go do dema work\" Mr Anyenini talk.
Right to Information (RTI) Coalition for Ghana say despite say passage of de RTI Bill, e no mean say dem for take tins easy as de implementation be crucial.
Parliament for Ghana pass Right to Information (RTI) Bill late evening on Tuesday afta 20 years since de first draft.
Members of Parliament sit for extra hours before dem finally do third reading of de RTI Bill, ryders what left be say de President for assent en signature to am so say e go turn law.
Second Deputy Speaker who chair de sitting, Alban Bagbin announce afta de third reading say;
\"E be de right of de good people pf Ghana to get all de information wey dey from people wey dem give power and trust for and behalf of Ghanaians.\"
\"I think say Ghanaians go now celebrate say we pass dis Bill, we hope say de President go sign de Bill as soon as e catch en office\" Mr Bagbin add.
Some Ghanaians praise government sake of President Akufo-Addo promise Ghanaians say he go pass de RTI Bill wey he deliver.
De RTI Bill go make am possible say de Ghanaians get constitutional right to demand information from public office holders and some private entities who dem give power den national resources to work."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"29"	2019-03-28	" The Media Foundation for West Africa has urged all stakeholders involved in the passage of the Right To Information Bill into law to remain vigilant as the law is taken through its implementation stage.
 The Foundation asserts this is of essence giving the duration given for the law to be activated as functional after its passage.
 Parliament passed the Right to Information bill on Tuesday, March 26, nearly 20 years after it was first drafted.
 Despite the passage into law of the bill, it will not take effect even when the Presidents gives his accent until the start of the next financial year to make room for budget allocations to be made.
 MFWA finds this particularly worrying as there is the tendency of delays or lack of commitment to operationalize it by some officials.
 “We wish to caution, however, that the real test is in the implementation of the law, and therefore, urge all stakeholders to remain alert. This caution is particularly appropriate because of the provision deferring the implementation of the law to the beginning of the 2020 financial year without detailing the timelines for putting in place the necessary structures and administrative systems for its effective realisation, as demanded by the Media Coalition on RTI,” the MFWA remarks.
 Stating their position on the issue, the Foundation observed that “It is obvious that coming nine years after it was first put before Parliament, amidst several back-and-forth and missed deadlines spanning three Parliaments, the law has been delivered grudgingly. Consequently, it is the view of the MFWA that the public, civil society organisations and the media will have to follow the implementation process with the same vigilance and outspoken campaigns to prevent the RTI law from becoming a piece of legislative white elephant.”
 Despite this concern, Media Foundation for West Africa admitted that the passage of the legislature was a boost in the accountability and corruption fight and reiterated that, “As a piece of legislation intended to promote accountability and enhance the fight against corruption, the passing of the RTI law, which was first drafted in 1999, is certainly a positive development.”MFWA Welcomes Ghana’s RTI Law With Caution
 The Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA) cautiously welcomes the passing of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law by the Parliament of Ghana and calls for continued engagement on its implementation.
 The Law, which seeks to operationalise Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution that guarantees the right to information, was passed on March 26, 2019, 19 years after the process began. As a piece of legislation intended to promote accountability and enhance the fight against corruption, the passing of the RTI law, which was first drafted in 1999, is certainly a positive development.
 With the passage of the law, Ghana has moved closer to correcting a fundamental flaw in its anti-corruption and good governance legal framework. It also fulfills a longstanding commitment under the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative signed by the government in 2011.
 We, therefore, commend the leadership and members of Parliament, the media, the Media Coalition on RTI, the Ghana RTI Coalition and other citizens who played various roles in getting the RTI bill passed. We wish to caution, however, that the real test is in the implementation of the law, and therefore, urge all stakeholders to remain alert. This caution is particularly appropriate because of the provision deferring the implementation of the law to the beginning of the 2020 financial year without detailing the timelines for putting in place the necessary structures and administrative systems for its effective realisation, as demanded by the Media Coalition on RTI.
 The above concern, together with Article 13 which protects deliberative processes from disclosure under the RTI, constitutes a pitfall that needs to be watched and worked at going forward.
 It is obvious that coming nine years after it was first put before Parliament, amidst several back-and-forth and missed deadlines spanning three Parliaments, the law has been delivered grudgingly. Consequently, it is the view of the MFWA that the public, civil society organisations and the media will have to follow the implementation process with the same vigilance and outspoken campaigns to prevent the RTI law from becoming a piece of legislative white elephant.
 The RTI experience in Burkina Faso is a typical example of politicians appeasing public demands for access to information with a half-baked law. Four years after the Transitional Administration in that country passed a framework RTI Law no.051-2015/CNT, it is yet to be made functional, because a promised subsidiary legislation to operationalise it is yet to be passed.
 Sometimes too, when good laws are passed, its implementation is frustrated by a lack of commitment on the part of public officers accustomed to the old ways of secrecy.
 In the light of the Burkinabe experience and the fact that many other African countries have adopted RTI Laws that have made very little impact in promoting accountable and transparent governance, we reiterate the need for continued engagement on the outstanding issues about Ghana’s RTI Law. Consequently, we call on the media keep a strong focus on the implementation processes and to educate the public about their rights under the law."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"30"	2019-03-28	"Renowned journalist and a legal practitioner, Samson Lardy Anyenini has adviced stakeholders responsible for the full implementation of the Right to Information Bill (RTI) not to take another long time before making it a law.
The much awaited RTI Bill was finally passed in Parliament on Tuesday, March 26, 2019 since its inception some 20 years ago. The Bill was passed following the completion of its consideration stage after several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the Floor of the House.
The Bill is however, awaiting assent from President Nana Akufo-Addo.
Samson Anyenini hoped that the implementation of the law will not be postponed over ‘flimsy excuses’ like the passage process experienced in parliament.
“There was a deferred implementation because again, the flimsy and lame excuse was given that there was no budget and arrangement for it. So, we need to wait for the next financial year. Go and check the history of the Bill they took care of and ask the question, how many of them had any financial thing prepared for in advance. It was such a lame excuse. We took it.” He queried.
The leading member of the Coalition on RTI added that the legislature must desist from the ‘normal Parliament jargon’ of ‘oh we are doing it, we are on it, it’s in the pipeline’ and ensure the right measures are put in place before the law is effectively implemented.
In his words, “Start now. So that by the time the period is up, for us to now begin to roll it out effectivey everything would have been covered. There will be an LI. Let’s have it as quickly it ought to be”."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"31"	2019-03-28	"Deputy Minister of Railways Development, Hon. Andy Appiah Kubi has opined the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law will curb corruption in both private and public institutions in the country.
“Ghanaians now can access information easily regarding individuals activities with ease and by that one will be careful of doing corrupt things”, the government appointee pointed out when spoke to MyNewsGh.com‘s reporters in Kumasi
According to the New Patriotic Party (NPP) lawmaker for Asante North in the Ashanti Region, Ghanaians should be elated about the passage of the law which is yet to receive a presidential accent.
About RTI
The RTI is supposed to be a fundamental human right guaranteed by the Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The passage of the Bill gives substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society.”
The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999 under former President, Jerry John Rawlings.
The National Democratic Congress (NDC) in its 2008 and 2012 election manifestos promised to ensure the Bill was passed. In 2010, it was presented to Parliament for consideration.
In 2011, the government signed unto the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative with a commitment to pass the law. In November 2013, the Bill was formally laid before Parliament.
Former Attorney General, Deputy Dominic Ayine in 2015, moved the Bill for second reading in Parliament. In October 2016, the Bill was withdrawn and replaced with a new one which was immediately laid.
Following the dissolution of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic and the swearing-in of new Parliament in January 2017, the Bill had to be re-laid by the new government before work commences on it.
Also READ: Parliament passed Akufo-Addo’s luxury vehicle tax under duress – NPP MP exposes govt
Parliament finally passed RTI Bill into law on Tuesday, March 26, 2019, after several policy changes and amendments."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"32"	2019-03-28	" Editor-in-Chief of the New Crusading Guide newspaper, Kweku Baako Jnr., has reacted to the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill, with profound commendation to both the House and the ruling party; the New Patriotic Party (NPP).
 After almost two decades, Parliament finally passed the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law on Tuesday, following the completion of its consideration stage after several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the Floor of Parliament.
 The RTI bill, when it becomes law, will foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs.
 “It’s been a long journey,” said Kweku Baako while commending Parliament and the New Patriotic Party (NPP).
 “The seventh Parliament has done justice to this long-standing thing . . . it shows how far we have come in our democracy . . . one must commend the NPP when it comes to some of these advancements . . . We should all be proud as a people that we’ve got this far; now we look forward to the implementation,” he added during a panel discussion on Wednesday’s edition of ‘Kokrokoo’.
 According to him, “I am confident that this country will make it step by step especially as we have committed ourselves to the democratic dispensation”.About RTI
 The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
 The bill as it has been drafted is to give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society.”"	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"33"	2019-03-27	"The Second Deputy Speaker of Parliament Alban Bagbin has described the Right to Information Law which was passed Tuesday night as one of the best in the world.
\"Honourable members the RTI has gone through the third reading and is hereby duly passed. This law is one of the best ever passed in any part of the world,” he declared in Parliament immediately after the passage of the law.
The bill was relayed before Parliament in March last year by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice Joseph Kpemka Dindiok after the previous parliament, the sixth of the fourth republic failed to pass it into law.
It had been over two decades since it was first drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and more than a decade since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The much-anticipated bill was to be passed into law on Friday 22 March but was removed from the House’s order paper or programme line on Thursday 21 March by the Speaker of Parliament Prof Mike Oquaye after demands by Civil Society Organisations for their proposals to be incorporated into the bill before it is passed.
The bill was relayed before Parliament in March last year by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice Joseph Kpemka Dindiok after the previous parliament, the sixth of the fourth republic failed to pass it into law.
It had been over two decades since it was first drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and more than a decade since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The much-anticipated bill was to be passed into law on Friday 22 March but was removed from the House’s order paper or programme line on Thursday 21 March by the Speaker of Parliament Prof Mike Oquaye after demands by Civil Society Organisations for their proposals to be incorporated into the bill before it is passed."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"34"	2019-03-27	"Former Central Regional Chairman of the National Democratic Congress (NDC) and a now Social Commentator, Bernard Allotey Jacobs, has advised officials in general and Ministers and government appointees, in particular, to be more prudent and wary, especially now that the Right To Information (RTI) bill has been passed into law.
According to him, state officials with the penchant of escorting their girlfriends hotels must desist from the practice; that is if government is the one footing the bill since every action will be scrutinized under the RTI.
\"If somebody takes his girlfriend to a hotel; and perhaps the bill is being footed by government, and the person is a minister, you can imagine what will happen...I know what I am talking about. Those living secret lives should be careful,” he added.
Allotey Jacobs was reacting to the passage of the RTI bill by Parliament on Tuesday, March 26 during a panel discussion on Wednesday's edition of Peace FM morning show, 'Kokrokoo'.
The Bill that gives substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society” was passed following the completion of its consideration stage after several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the Floor of the House.
Background
The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
It was first drafted in 1999 under former President, Jerry John Rawlings.
Various advocacy groups emerged to press for the immediate passing of the bill into law in 2002 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007.
The National Democratic Congress (NDC) in its 2008 and 2012 election manifestos promised to ensure the Bill was passed. In 2010, it was presented to Parliament for consideration.
Following the dissolution of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic and the swearing-in of new Parliament in January 2017, the Bill had to be re-laid by the new government.
That was done and the Bill has been receiving attention by the house but not without pressure from CSOs to expedite action on it.
Watch video below"	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"35"	2019-03-27	"The Chairman of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of Parliament Ben Abdallah disclosed on Wednesday that the cost of implementing the Right to Information Law is unknown to Parliament, barely 24 hours after its passage.
Ghana’s Parliament passed the long-awaited RTI Bill into Law on Tuesday.
The Bill, which was relayed before Parliament in March last year by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice Joseph Kpemka Dindiok after the previous parliament, the sixth of the fourth republic failed to pass it into law was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) over two decades ago and more than a decade since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill.
Speaking to Starr News’ Parliamentary Correspondent Ibrahim Alhassan barely a day after the Bill was passed into Law, Abdallah said the cost involved in the implementation of the RTI Law is unknown because of some procedural mishaps.
“The law requires, section 100 of the public financial management act requires that every Bill that is brought to Parliament must be accompanied by a fiscal impact statement. Unfortunately, that was not done with respect to the Right to Information Bill. If that was done Parliament will have known in advance how much it will cost for the Right to Information Bill to be implemented,” he stated.
That notwithstanding, he expressed delight in the ability of the seventh Parliament of the fourth republic to pass the RTI Bill into Law.
“I feel good. It is like you have been given an assignment and you have been able to complete the assignment. You feel very relieved. It is like you are carrying a load and that load has been taken off your head. You feel very elated, you feel very happy more especially when the Right to Information Bill has suffered a lot of parliamentary adjournment so to speak.
“It has travelled from 1999 that is when we started this journey, it comes to parliament then it goes back because when a Bill enters Parliament and Parliament is not able to deal with the Bill automatically lapses. That has been the trajectory and the checked history of the Bill.
So, if ultimately the Bill has crystallised into law it is good for all of us, it is good for democracy, it is good for Ghana and it is good for parliament,” he stated.
Meanwhile, Communications consultant and dean of communication studies at the Wisconsin University College Professor Kwame Karikari has urged Ghanaians and the media to be cautious with their jubilation over the passage of the Right to Information Law by Parliament.
He says until the content of the new law is studied and accepted to be responsive to the challenges with information gathering in the country, there is a need for caution among stakeholders.
“The RTI bill may either enhance the access to information or rubbish the whole process and that is why we are interested in the content of the bill. Until we see, read and study what the act contains, we cannot jubilate and have a party."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"36"	2019-03-27	"The National Communications Officer of the National Democratic Congress (NDC), Sammy Gyamfi, says the Akufo-Addo-led government has made corruption so attractive that it has become a venture for its appointees.
He adds that the government has failed in its fight against corruption and it cannot pin its hope in the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill to fight the canker.
Speaking on TV3’s New Day on Wednesday, Sammy Gyamfi said corruption cases like the visa racketeering that rocked Ghana’s 2018 Commonwealth Games participation justify the wide perception that the current government is steeped in graft.
He was speaking after a Deputy Minister of Information, Pius Enam-Hadzide, touted the passage of the RTI Bill, on Tuesday, as a great step in the fight against corruption by the government.
Mr Enam-Hadzide said the government deserves praise for making sure that the Bill, which has been in and out of Parliament, has finally been passed.
But Sammy Gyamfi directly pointed out to the Deputy Minister that he was an example of corruption in the current government, citing how the latter was cleared by the president in the probe into the Commonwealth Games case.
Mr Enam-Hadzide was the Deputy Youth and Sports Minister when the case happened.
The Deputy Information Minister, however, strongly disagreed with the NDC national officer for his assertions.
But Sammy Gyamfi insisted: “You are the worst government when it comes to the fight against corruption”.
He rather saw the passage of the RTI Bill as a “significant achievement for the country” and no single government can lay claim to its passage.
He observed that it is a feather in the cup of Ghana as a beacon of democracy in Africa."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"37"	2019-03-27	" Minority Leader in Parliament Haruna Iddrisu says a celebration of the passing of the long awaited Right To Information Bill by the incumbent government will be contradictory seeing that the latter spearheaded the obstructing of its passage at an earlier submission.
 Although not the ‘ideal’ bill for all concerned parties, the MP for Tamale South stated that “every law passed by Parliament is a good law” and thus could be operational for now.
 Mr. Iddrisu stated that the bill could be reviewed and amended if the need arose but noted that the bill will deepen accountability in the governance and government institutions as well as promote transparency.
 Speaking to journalists during an adjournment of sitting in the House, he explained that the window to tighten the loose ends in the bill in order to make it fully ready and apt.
 Asked what he made of the Akufo-Addo administration taking credit for the passing of the Right To Information Bill, the Minority Leader maintained that it would be a much ado about nothing as members of the then Minority in Parliament opposed the bill when it was presented by former Speaker of Parliament Doe Adjaho describing it as a last grasp move by the Mahama administration after losing the 2016 elections.
 “… I have no difficulty with them saying that it was passed under us when they are the same people who obstructed its passage; go back to the records, when honourable Adjaho reintroduced it before January 2017. So you don’t obstruct and come back and take credit”, he concludedBackground
 The RTI is supposed to be a fundamental human right guaranteed by the Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
 The passage of the Bill gives substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society.”
 The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999 under former President, Jerry John Rawlings.
 The National Democratic Congress (NDC) in its 2008 and 2012 election manifestos promised to ensure the Bill was passed. In 2010, it was presented to Parliament for consideration.
 In 2011, the government signed unto the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative with a commitment to pass the law. In November 2013, the Bill was formally laid before Parliament.
 Former Attorney General, Deputy Dominic Ayine in 2015, moved the Bill for second reading in Parliament. In October 2016, the Bill was withdrawn and replaced with a new one which was immediately laid.
 Following the dissolution of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic and the swearing-in of new Parliament in January 2017, the Bill had to be re-laid by the new government before work commences on it."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"38"	2019-03-27	"A leading member of the Right to Information Bill Coalition (RTI Coalition), Samson Lardy Anyenini has lauded the President’s disposition about the passage of the RTI bill into law.
The RTI Bill which was laid before the seventh government after its failure to be passed by the 5th and 6th parliaments was finally approved Tuesday March 27, 2019 and awaiting the President’s assent to be made law. 
Prior to this however, it had been in Parliament for close to two decades despite calls from the media and civil society groups for its passage.
Mr. Lardy Anyenini, speaking to Ghanaweb noted that he had trust in the President’s willingness to pass the bill and is looking forward to swift action from him as far as assenting is concerned so processes can begin towards its implementation.
“The President’s promise was that immediately this law was passed, he would assent to it to make it law, I expect that by now he should have assented to it. I know that deep within him as the president, he wanted this bill to be passed and that’s good”, he stated.
“Let the state commit sufficient resources to do the groundwork including the LI so that we can get off with it”, he added.
He was of the conviction that ‘good faith’ and commitment to the implementation will drive the relevant authorities to take action in that direction to ensure results.
Mr. Anyenini was also optimistic about the role of the law in promoting transparency and accountability in governance. 
“We might have to continue to push for those who want to give excuses.
“I believe that once there is good faith and we are committed to the implementation, we can work towards the perfection of this particular law”. 
“I believe that we have something that we can work with moving forward that expands the frontiers of access to information, will help open governance, transparency and will help citizens better do their job which they are mandated to do in article 41F of the constitution that they should combat misuse and corruption, they should expose that, so I think it is in the good direction”, he added.. "	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"39"	2019-03-27	"Communications consultant and dean of communication studies at the Wisconsin University College Professor Kwame Karikari has urged Ghanaians and the media to be cautious with their jubilation over the passage of the Right to Information Law by Parliament.
He says until the content of the new law is studied and accepted to be  responsive to the challenges with information gathering in the country, there is the need for caution among stakeholders.
Parliament passed the RTI into law on Tuesday March 26. It had been over two decades since it was first drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and more than a decade since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The passage of the law has been celebrated by Ghanaians especially the media.
Speaking to Francis Abban on the Morning Starr Wednesday, Prof. Karikari said the law may not be very helpful to the media on the daily reportage of  events.
“The RTI bill may either enhance the access to information or rubbish the whole process and that is why we are interested in the content of the bill. Until we see, read and study what the act contains, we cannot jubilate and have a party.
“If the document does not meet our expectations and give us the necessary provisions, we will fight against it in court but we are hoping for the best.  The media should not put too much premium on the RTI Bill because the bill will not necessarily help journalists meet deadlines and achieve quality daily news production,” he said.
He further noted: “There may be some information on the desk of the President and/or his Vice and on the desk of the police that may not be for public consumption and so people shouldn’t expect all information out there. Records are poorly kept in this country and destroyed. A whole new culture is required so that vital information will be kept and made available when need be”."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"40"	2019-03-27	"The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) Ghana, Media Coalition on RTI and OccupyGhana have called on President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo to quickly approve the Right to Information law which was passed by Parliament Tuesday evening.
The groups in a press statement also asked government to put all the needed measures in place to ensure the law becomes operational by January 2020.
During his recent state of the nation address, the president assured that “I will happily assent to it as soon as it’s brought to my table”, a promise the Coalition is reminding him to keep.
“Now that the Bill has been passed, we expect that President Akufo-Addo will assent to it swiftly just as he promised in his last address to Parliament on the State of the Nation. We are hopeful that government will put in place all needed processes to ensure that the new law commences operation at the start of the next financial year, which is January 2020.”
Parliament finally passed the RTI Bill Tuesday, 26th March 2019, several years after it was first laid before the house.
The Bill was passed following the completion of its consideration stage after several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the Floor of the House.
Reacting to the passage of the bill, the Coalition expressed disappointment in parliament’s failure to “consider a few final amendments we proposed which goes to the heart of the Bill, especially the ‘timeframe for putting in place the necessary structure for effective implementation’”.
They were however hopeful that some of their concerns will be addressed in the Regulations which will come later to operationalize the law."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"41"	2019-03-27	" A leading member of the Right to Information Coalition Kofi Bentil says the coalition will fight any attempt by politicians to conceal information to the public under the guise of National Security following the passage of the Right to Information Law (RTI).
 Despite the passage of the RTI, there are fears among some Ghanaians that politicians and government officials may seek to hide key information by simply flagging it national security document.
 Speaking to Francis Abban on the Morning Starr Wednesday, the legal practitioner and Vice Chair of IMANI Africa said the implementation of the law will be keenly monitored.
 “We are happy the RTI bill has been considered but that is not to say it is perfect. We are ready to work at it and make it better. Going forward, no one has the right to say they do not have information on an issue or another. We know there will be times where information will be kept from the public in the name of national security but that will have to be clearly defined,” he said.
 Meanwhile, Communications consultant and dean of communication studies at the Wisconsin University College Professor Kwame Karikari has urged Ghanaians and the media to be cautious with their jubilation over the passage of the Right to Information Law by Parliament.
 He says until the content of the new law is studied and accepted to be responsive to the challenges with information gathering in the country, there is the need for caution among stakeholders.
 “The RTI bill may either enhance the access to information or rubbish the whole process and that is why we are interested in the content of the bill. Until we see, read and study what the act contains, we cannot jubilate and have a party.
 “If the document does not meet our expectations and give us the necessary provisions, we will fight against it in court but we are hoping for the best.  The media should not put too much premium on the RTI Bill because the bill will not necessarily help journalists meet deadlines and achieve quality daily news production,” he said."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"42"	2019-03-27	"The RTI Coalition though has welcomed the passage of the Right to Information Act (RTI), clearly has major issues with the extensive publicity government, some members of parliament and indeed some members of the public are attaching to it.
Leading member of the coalition, Samson Lardy Anyenini doesn’t fail to acknowledge the passage of the act but finds it rather unnecessary that so much credit is being taken for it when it actually is merely the fulfillment of a mandate as commanded by the constitution and more so was done only after so much pressure was piled on parliament and government.
“The law has been passed but there’s a lot of work to be done after the passage. I’ve heard people talk about celebration because of the passage of the law. For myself, I’m feeling the exhaustion, I am so exhausted, I am not in the mood at all to join any celebrations”.
Parliament finally approved the passage of Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law Tuesday 27 March 2019 following several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the Floor of the House.
The RTI Bill had prior to this, been in Parliament for close to two decades despite calls from the media and civil society groups for its passage.
Speaking to Ghanaweb on the subject, Mr. Anyenini said the circumstances that led to the passage of the law are evidence enough that the interest of citizens have been toyed with.
 “Why should a law that the constitution; the Supreme law of the country commands should be passed and the constitution has been in existence since 1992 - 93, and this law that article 21 commands should be passed to enable the citizens to fully exercise the rights of access to information has been toyed with” he stated.
“It has taken citizens, it has taken the RTI Coalition, it has taken persons to use their individual efforts and influence to campaign, crusade and literally pressure government to pay attention to the law. This law is one of the basic, fundamental to the individual citizen’s exercise of their right to information and yet the members of parliament who claim to represent the interest of citizens in that house have had to wait and to be compelled literally before they would pass that law, for me, it throws up a lot of questions”, he continued.
Attempts to describe the passage of the law as ‘benevolence’ to citizens he said is insulting particularly considering the fact that public resources had been wasted in previous times in the name of ‘consultations’ by both parliaments and yet zero results were seen.
“The fifth parliament went around the country, solicited views in the name of consultations, got the law ready, it didn’t pass it, do you know what that meant? Waste of public resources. The sixth parliament repeated the same exercise, in the end, they didn’t pass it, waste of public resource and this seventh parliament also had to wait for so much pressure to be exerted and then eventually, it has passed it”, he said. 
Adding, “We can’t take it away from them, we must say congratulations, it’s been done but I don’t think that there is particular need for any commendations for what is a duty to be done to the public. I don’t think it is done and ought to be seen as someone’s benevolence to the citizens, I think that is an insult to the citizens”."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"43"	2019-03-27	"The RTI Coalition though has welcomed the passage of the Right to Information Act (RTI), clearly has major issues with the extensive publicity government, some members of parliament and indeed some members of the public are attaching to it.
Leading member of the coalition, Samson Lardy Anyenini doesn’t fail to acknowledge the passage of the act but finds it rather unnecessary that so much credit is being taken for it when it actually is merely the fulfillment of a mandate as commanded by the constitution and more so was done only after so much pressure was piled on parliament and government.
“The law has been passed but there’s a lot of work to be done after the passage. I’ve heard people talk about celebration because of the passage of the law. For myself, I’m feeling the exhaustion, I am so exhausted, I am not in the mood at all to join any celebrations”.
Parliament finally approved the passage of Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law Tuesday 27 March 2019 following several policy changes, amendments and months of rigorous debates on the Floor of the House.
The RTI Bill had prior to this, been in Parliament for close to two decades despite calls from the media and civil society groups for its passage.
Speaking to Ghanaweb on the subject, Mr. Anyenini said the circumstances that led to the passage of the law are evidence enough that the interest of citizens have been toyed with.
 “Why should a law that the constitution; the Supreme law of the country commands should be passed and the constitution has been in existence since 1992 - 93, and this law that article 21 commands should be passed to enable the citizens to fully exercise the rights of access to information has been toyed with” he stated.
“It has taken citizens, it has taken the RTI Coalition, it has taken persons to use their individual efforts and influence to campaign, crusade and literally pressure government to pay attention to the law. This law is one of the basic, fundamental to the individual citizen’s exercise of their right to information and yet the members of parliament who claim to represent the interest of citizens in that house have had to wait and to be compelled literally before they would pass that law, for me, it throws up a lot of questions”, he continued.
Attempts to describe the passage of the law as ‘benevolence’ to citizens he said is insulting particularly considering the fact that public resources had been wasted in previous times in the name of ‘consultations’ by both parliaments and yet zero results were seen.
“The fifth parliament went around the country, solicited views in the name of consultations, got the law ready, it didn’t pass it, do you know what that meant? Waste of public resources. The sixth parliament repeated the same exercise, in the end, they didn’t pass it, waste of public resource and this seventh parliament also had to wait for so much pressure to be exerted and then eventually, it has passed it”, he said. 
Adding, “We can’t take it away from them, we must say congratulations, it’s been done but I don’t think that there is particular need for any commendations for what is a duty to be done to the public. I don’t think it is done and ought to be seen as someone’s benevolence to the citizens, I think that is an insult to the citizens”."	19	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0
"44"	2019-03-25	" Government is commencing preparatory work ahead of the passage of the Right to Information Bill which is expected to be passed in Parliament this week.
 The 7th Parliament of the 4th republic has in good time completed the consideration stage of the RTI bill after several policy changes and amendments and months of rigorous debates on the floor of the house.
 Currently there are further new petitions asking for further amendments to provisions of the bill. However Parliament is minded to pass the bill into law this week, and send it for Presidential assent soon thereafter.
 Minister for Information Kojo Oppong Nkrumah told Journalists in Accra that the bill in its current form requires the establishment of Information Units in all public offices, recruitment and training of information officers to man these units, establishment of the RTI commission and the completion of various administrative protocols before the commencement of the next fiscal year.
 “These are necessary to ensure that there will indeed be the infrastructure that can deliver on the RTI requests filed under this new law” he said.
 He said the new law will be a major addition to the credential of Ghana as a strong democracy and President Akufo-Addo who for many years has championed the cause of enhancing the frontiers of human rights.
 The Minister disclosed that government through the Ministry of Information, which will be the implementing ministry, has already commenced engagements in preparation of a roadmap for implementation.
 “We ask all who have followed the entire process to join in heralding the final passage and to cooperate with us in its implementation” he added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"45"	2019-03-24	"The government of Ghana through the Ministry of Information is commencing preparatory work ahead of the passage of the Right To Information (RTI) Bill which is expected to take place in parliament this week, the Information Minister has said.
Kojo Oppong Nkrumah commended parliament for completing the consideration stage of the RTI Bill “in good time” after several policy changes and amendments and months of rigorous debates on the floor of the house.
Laid in March last year, the RTI Bill was first brought to Parliament in 2010 but could not be passed by the two previous Parliaments.
The momentum to have it passed gathered in 2017 in the formation of coalitions to put pressure on the House after it came close to passing it in 2016.
The Minister disclosed that although there are new petitions asking for amendments to provisions of the Bill, the Legislative arm of government is minded to pass the Bill into law this week and then sent for Presidential ascent. 
“The Bill is currently in its form requiring the establishment of information unit in all public offices, recruitment and training of information officers to man this unit, establishment of the RTI commission and the completion of various administrative protocols before the commencement of the next fiscal year.” He said.
He however, added that, “these are necessary to ensure that there will be the needed infrastructure that can deliver on the RTI request that will be filed under this new law. The new law will be a major addition to the credentials of Ghana as a strong democracy.”"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"46"	2019-03-24	"The Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Mike Oquaye on Friday halted the third reading of the Right To Information (RTI) Bill, 2018 which would have paved the way for the passage of the bill.
The third reading of the RTI Bill had been advertised on the Order Paper for yesterday’s business, but the speaker asked that it should be deferred since there had been further proposals and amendments by some Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) to certain aspects of the bill, which when passed, will not serve the best interest of the ordinary Ghanaians.
This means that the RTI would have to be taken through second consideration stage for those proposed amendments to be considered.
Meanwhile, Chairman of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament, Ben Abdallah Banda, has stated that parliament should not be blamed for the delay in the passage of the bill.
He revealed that the leadership of parliament has expedited action on the bill because it’s “passionate about it.”
Mr. Banda pointed out that “the Executive has done its part, parliament has also done its part, it’s the coalition to the Right to Information that says they don’t want it to be passed the way we have done it so the public should take it that it is not Ghana Parliament that is trying not to pass the Act now.”
The object of the RTI Bill is to provide for the operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society.
It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and provide for related matters."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"47"	2019-03-22	" Parliament has suspended the passage of the long-awaited Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law until further notice.
 The decision followed a directive by the Speaker, Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye in Accra yesterday that the third reading of the bill – the final legislative step – as advertised, was deleted from the Order Paper; the activity schedule of the House.
 The third reading had featured on the Order Paper since Tuesday with assurances by the Majority Leader, Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, that the over two-decade-old bill would be passed by close of week today.
 Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu told the House on Wednesday that “the matter of policy has been sorted out” and that there was no impediment on the route to the passage of the bill.
 But when Speaker Oquaye called for that motion, numbered seven on the Order Paper, during proceedings yesterday, the Deputy Majority Leader, Sarah Adwoa Safo, said the Committee on Constitutional, Parliamentary and Legal Affairs was yet to finish its work on the bill.
 According to Ms Safo, the committee was still in talks with Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) to iron out some clauses and that the House put on hold.
 Responding to the request of the Deputy Majority Leader, Speaker Oquaye directed that the advertisement of the bill on the Order Paper seized until the consultations were concluded.
 In his view, deleting the item and allowing for further consultations and “other viewpoints on this matter” will only make the bill more credible.
 Speaking on the issue, the Deputy Minority Chief Whip, Ibrahim Ahmed, said Parliament remained committed to the passage of the bill.
 He, however, wants Ghanaians to blame the CSOs for holding back the House from passing the bill.
 “The executive has done its part. This parliament, we have also done our part. But it’s the Coalition to the Right to Information…….they are saying that they don’t want it to be passed the way we have done it so they are bringing other things.
 “The public should understand that it is not Ghana’s Parliament that is trying not to pass the RTI but it is the public that is bringing new amendments to the work that we have done so far. Left with us alone, we have done what we should do,” he stated.
 Assuring of the House’s resolve to see the bill passed, Speaker Oquaye said “the Parliament of Ghana has done and will continue to do its bit” in regards to the RTI.
 The RTI was up for approval at the beginning of this meeting in January but the committee asked for more time to engage CSOs on some grey areas in the bill.
 This means that after the consultations, if new introductions were made, the House would have to take the bill through a second consideration stage at the plenary.
 Laid in March last year, the RTI Bill was first brought to Parliament in 2010 but could not be passed by the two previous Parliaments.
 The momentum to have it passed gathered in 2017 in the formation of coalitions to put pressure on the House after it came close to passing it in 2016."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"48"	2019-03-22	" Parliament on Thursday during the house’s sitting had to postpone motion and consideration of the long standing Right To Information Bill yet again.
 Speaker of the Legislative House, Prof. Aaron Mike Oquaye called for the removal of the Bill from the motion paper after the reading of the Bill.
 His action was necessitated by the Civil Society Organisation’s decision to make additional proposals to be inserted into the bill.
 The action brings to naught attempts and efforts by Members of Parliament to pass the Bill resulting in the further adjournment of the timeline set for its passage.
 Commenting on the development however, Chairman of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament and deputy Minority Whip, Ahmed Ibrahim, stressed that Parliament should not be blamed for the delay in the passage of the bill as vigorous efforts had been put to finalizing it.
 The Member of Parliament for Banda noted: “The executive have done their part, parliament has also done out part, it is the coalition to the Right to Information, they are saying they don’t want it to be passed the way we have done it…so the public should take that it is not Ghana parliament that is trying not to pass the RTI but it is the public that is bringing new amendment to the work we've done so far.\"
 He explained that the leadership was passionate about the bill but submissions from public coalitions were to be blamed for the delays but added that the House would get it passed by Friday.Background
 22 years since the first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill, it was finally laid before Parliament early this month to be considered for passage.
 The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010. Government came under massive pressure to get the bill laid following fears that government was deliberately delaying the process."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"49"	2019-03-22	" The Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Mike Oquaye has ordered the removal of the Right to Information bill from parliament’s motion paper on Thursday.
 The order preceded a planned reading of the bill for the third time as captured by the Order Paper.
 The Speaker’s action was necessitated by the Civil Society Organisations’ decision to make additional proposals to be inserted into the bill.
 Meanwhile, Chairman of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament and deputy Minority Whip, Ben Abdallah Banda, says parliament should not be blamed for the delay in the passage of the bill.
 He noted that the leadership of parliament has “expedited action” on the bill because it is “passionate about it”.
 He pointed out, “The executive have done their part, parliament has also done out part, it is the coalition to the Right to Information, they are saying they don’t want it to be passed the way we have done it…so the public should take that it is not Ghana parliament that is trying not to pass the Act now.”Background
 The object of the RTI Bill is to provide for the operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society.
 It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and to provide for related matters.
 The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010. It was brought back to the Sixth Parliament but could not be passed till the expiration of that Parliament on January 6, 2016.
 After months of waiting, the Bill was laid in Parliament early last year (2018) by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Mr Joseph Dindiok.
 The RTI Bill has passed through the first and second readings."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"50"	2019-03-22	"Daily Graphic 
  * 2 firewomen reinstated 
  * Ghana to receive $185.2m from IMF after final review 
  * 2 women murdered in Kumasi * Cabinet approves rebranding of Non-Formal EducationDaily Guide 
  * Ghana grabs $185m from IMF 
  * NDC 'swerves' NPP on vigilante talks 
  * $100m for soldiers - Government 
  * 2 women raped and killed in Kumasi 
 * Greenstreet diagnoses cedi problemGhanaian Times 
  * Let's set up international courts for trials of West Africa cross-border crimes 
  * Akufo-Addo pledges Govt's unflinching support for military 
  * Suzuki to set up production plant in GhanaDaily Statesman 
  * Army to get $100m upgrade 
  * SSNIT is \"committed to its vision and mandate\" 
  * Mahama in limbo over running-mateFinder 
  * $185.2m IMF cash incoming 
  * Govt fully committed to welfare of armed forces - Akufo-Addo 
  * RTI Bill stepped down for further amendments 
  * CLAAG threatens demo over NLA mismanagement  Chronicle 
  * It's taboo to report husband beaters to the police - Chief 
  * Importers kick against operation of private taskforce 
  * Bleaching unborn babies dangerous"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"51"	2019-03-21	"The chairman for the constitutional, legal and parliamentary affairs committee of parliament, Ben Abdalla, has asked Ghanaians to blame the country’s civil society organisations for the recent delays in the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law.
The much-awaited passage of the bill into law, according to the majority leader and minister for parliamentary affairs, Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu will come off Friday, March 22.
Speaking on the floor of parliament Wednesday he stated that “the matter of policy has been sorted out” thus nothing prevents them from bringing matters to closure in reference to the passage of the bill into law.
It is now unlikely following pressure from CSOs, especially the RTI Coalition for their proposals to be incorporated into the bill before it is passed.
This, compelled the Speaker of parliament Prof Mike Oquaye to instruct the removal of the RTI bill from the House’s order paper on Thursday.
The move, he said was to allow further consultations and “other viewpoints on this matter.”
But in reaction to the Speaker’s directive, the chairman for the constitutional, legal and parliamentary affairs committee of parliament charged Ghanaians to hold the CSOs responsibility for the House’s inability to get the bill passed into law.
He said: “The executive has done its part. This parliament, we have also done our part. But it’s the Coalition to the Right to Information…they are saying that they don’t want it to be passed the way we have done it.
“So the public should take it that it is not Ghana’s Parliament that’s trying not to pass the RTI.”
The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok March last year and it has been over two decades since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and more than a decade since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"52"	2019-03-21	"The much anticipated Right to Information Bill will finally be passed into law on Friday, March 22.
This was disclosed by the Majority Leader and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu Wednesday.
“Mr Speaker, as I said, the matter of policy has been sorted out. What is left now is that new proposals have come from civil society for us to factor them into the bill. Other than that, nothing prevents us from bringing matters to a closure.
“That’s why I’m saying it is even possible to bring matters to a closure this week, Friday,” Mr Mensah-Bonsu stated.
His comments come on the back of warnings by the second deputy speaker Alban Bagbin that Parliament will be compelled to pass the bill into law if the issues of policies are not resolved.
“The house is ready and willing to pass it. But the issues of policy have cropped in and two ministries are holding us up. But the public is blaming us for not passing the bill. More importantly, the Right to Information Bill, we give notice to the relevant ministries that we can no longer wait on them and we will be compelled to complete it without whatever they are doing.
“There’s no perfect law anywhere in the world and what we are doing is one of the best in the world so far and so there’s nothing with us passing it. And if the need be, there’s nothing wrong with us coming back to make those necessary amendments to the bill,” he stated.The RTI
The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year.
It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"53"	2019-03-21	"Speaker of Parliament Prof Mike Oquaye has ordered the removal of the Right to Information bill from the House’s order paper Thursday.
The order was necessitated by demands by Civil Society Organisations for some amendments to be effected before the passage of the bill into law.
The RTI Coalition has presented some proposals to be incorporated into the bill before passage.
Announcing the directive, the Speaker said “We are duty bound to listen to other view points on this matter.”
The Speaker’s directive comes barely 24hours after the Majority Leader and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs disclosed the Bill will be passed into law on Friday March 22.
“Mr Speaker, as I said, the matter of policy has been sorted out. What is left now is that new proposals have come from civil society for us to factor them into the bill. Other than that, nothing prevents us from bringing matters to a closure.
“That’s why I’m saying it is even possible to bring matters to a closure this week, Friday,” Mr Mensah-Bonsu stated.
Second deputy speaker Alban Bagbin during Wednesday’s parliamentary proceedings urged CSOs to lessen their push for their proposals to be ingrained in the bill at all cost.
He said: “Civil societies should be informed that these things are evolutionary, not revolutionary. They are evolutionary and so some of the proposals could be legislated upon but they could be held up when it comes to issues of implementation.”The RTI
The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year.
It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"54"	2019-03-18	" The Head Pastor of the Alabaster International Ministries, Prophet Dr Kofi Oduro has slammed Parliament for its slothful posturing towards the passing of the Right to Information Bill, MyNewsGh.com reports.
 “I’m asking our parliamentarians, Right to Information Bill, when will it be passed”, he quizzed, while delivering a sermon at the Tesano Centre of the church on Sunday morning and monitored by MyNewsGh.com.
 “If we were passing car loans, you would have passed it long ago; when will the Right to Information Bill be passed? Honourables! I’m telling you the mind of God”, he lashed out at Ghanaian MPs.
 Though the right to information bill is a fundamental human right enshrined in the 1992 Constitution, it has taken Ghana’s Parliament more than two decades to pass the RTI Bill into Law.
 The Bill which is still in the consideration stage after it was laid before Parliament in 2013 has yet to receive any deliberate commitment by governments past and president.
 President Nana Akufo Addo, Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia and Speaker of Parliament, Prof Aaron Mike Oquaye have all assured of deadlines for the passing of the bill into law but never saw the light of day.
 Not even pressure from the media and civil society organisations have compelled Parliament to expedite processes to make the RTI law a reality.
 Some MPs have even had cause to argue that, the RTI Bill if passed into law would expose government’s secrets and have vowed to resist its passage.
 “I know of no confused line of leadership than the Government of Ghana; this government starts something, the other abolishes it and start another thing”, Prophet Kofi Oduro preached.
 He decried the lack of consistency in our political dispensation and lambasted successive governments for toying with Ghana’s education sector.
 “We can go for 4 years and now we are going for 3 years and then even in the 3 years we have green, blue and yellow tracks; some people go for 3 months, others come for sabbatical leave for 3 months and that’s the kind of thing”, the reason he said is that “we don’t have a national policy and a national agenda”. He observed.
 The hope of realising a Ghana where basic human rights would be respected and MPs championed the course of their constituents, 62 years after independence remains a dream."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"55"	2019-03-17	"The Head Pastor of the Alabaster International Ministries, Prophet Dr Kofi Oduro has slammed Parliament for its slothful posturing towards the passing of the Right to Information Bill, MyNewsGh.com reports.
“I’m asking our parliamentarians, Right to Information Bill, when will it be passed”, he quizzed, while delivering a sermon at the Tesano Centre of the church on Sunday morning and monitored by MyNewsGh.com.
“If we were passing car loans, you would have passed it long ago; when will the Right to Information Bill be passed? Honourables! I’m telling you the mind of God”, he lashed out at Ghanaian MPs.
Though the right to information bill is a fundamental human right enshrined in the 1992 Constitution, it has taken Ghana’s Parliament more than two decades to pass the RTI Bill into Law.
The Bill which is still in the consideration stage after it was laid before Parliament in 2013 has yet to receive any deliberate commitment by governments past and president.
President Nana Akufo Addo, Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia and Speaker of Parliament, Prof Aaron Mike Oquaye have all assured of deadlines for the passing of the bill into law but never saw the light of day.
Not even pressure from the media and civil society organisations have compelled Parliament to expedite processes to make the RTI law a reality.
Some MPs have even had cause to argue that, the RTI Bill if passed into law would expose government’s secrets and have vowed to resist its passage.
“I know of no confused line of leadership than the Government of Ghana; this government starts something, the other abolishes it and start another thing”, Prophet Kofi Oduro preached.
He decried the lack of consistency in our political dispensation and lambasted successive governments for toying with Ghana’s education sector.
“We can go for 4 years and now we are going for 3 years and then even in the 3 years we have green, blue and yellow tracks; some people go for 3 months, others come for sabbatical leave for 3 months and that’s the kind of thing”, the reason he said is that, “we don’t have a national policy and a national agenda”. He observed.
The hope of realising a Ghana where basic human rights would be respected and MPs championed the course of their constituents, 62 years after independence remains a dream."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"56"	2019-03-05	" Vice president of IMANI Ghana, Kofi Bentil has described parliament as a \"failure’’ due to how they handle the passage of the Right to Information Bill (RTI).
 Touching on his observation concerning how MP’s have so far handled the bill, he expressed worry about their deliberate laid-back attitudes towards it.
 He supported his claims with several reasons including the legislators being unable to serve as an effective check on the president’s rule, describing them as the worst culprits of absenteeism and so on.
 In relation to the issue of absenteeism, Mr Bentil established that Members of Parliament deliberately ‘shy away’ from Chamber anytime the RTI Bill which forms part of the fundamental human rights of Ghanaians is up for consideration.
 Due to this, the Vice President of IMANI Ghana has concluded that MP’s are more than ever unable to effectively participate in promoting good governance by establishing necessary checks on the executive and have also frustrated the passage of the RTI into a law.
 \"We have a parliament which is defective. I say this publicly because when we finish this RTI, the first thing we should do is to reform parliament. We have 275 members of parliament, we pay them very good money. Most of the time, most of them don’t go to work. At each sitting to discuss the bill, more than 80% of them are not at work’’ he quantifiedOver 200 MPs abandon RTI Bill. 
 Over 200 Members of Parliament are consistently absent from the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration.
 It is on record that only between 30 and 50 MPs are in the chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration over the past weeks."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"57"	2019-02-22	" President Akufo Addo has indicated his readiness to sign the much-awaited Right to Information Bill into law soon after it is passed by Parliament.
 “Mr Speaker, I’m happy to state that as you know, Parliament has virtually completed its deliberation on the Right to Information Bill and any moment from now the nation will hear the news of its long-anticipated passing. I will happily assent to it as soon as it’s brought to my table,” President Akufo Addo said while delivering his third State of the Nation Address in Parliament on Thursday, February 21, 2019.
 The Right to Information Bill, when passed, will take effect only in the 2020 financial year.
 This follows an amendment proposed by the majority leader and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu on Wednesday.
 Financial provision for the implementation of an RTI law had not been made in the 2019 budget.
 That, according to Mensah Bonsu, makes the implementation of the RTI bill when passed into law improbable.
 “So I guess what we could do is to say that the act shall come into effect in the 2020 financial year,” he stated on the floor of Parliament.
 “We need to train information officers. We need to have information officers allocated or in some cases constructed.
 “So we’ll urge government then that if there will be any supplementary estimates some allocations should be made to start this in earnest so that into the next financial year which is 2020, we shall have a full-scale implementation of the right to information bill,” he added.
 Mensah Bonsu’s position was unanimously accepted by the House.
 The Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Aaron Mike Ocquaye, December last year asked civil society groups to “leave” parliament alone to finish work on the RTI Bill.
 According to Prof. Ocquaye, Parliament has completed 80% of work on the bill and will pass it by February 2019.
 The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year.
 It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
 The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"58"	2019-02-21	"DAGBON
1. A month ago, almost to the day, I was in Yendi, fittingly attired as a self-proclaimed Prince of Dagbon, Prince Abudani, the first of that lineage, to witness the installation of Yaa-Na Mahama Abukari II as the overlord of Dagbon.
2. Thousands of our compatriots were there to share in the joy of the occasion. It was a ceremony that many had despaired we would ever see, but a new Yaa-Na, accepted by the two gates of Abudu and Andani, was installed on that day.
3. The installation of a new Yaa-Na brought to an end decade of feuding that laid low the proud and ancient kingdom of Dagbon. It was a happy day, and it marked the climax of a long, tortuous journey, and a hard grind on the part of many people through the years.
4. Two years ago, when I had the honour to become President of our country, I decided to summon all the resources of the state and my own energies, and make a concerted effort through the dedicated, patriotic Committee of Eminent Chiefs that had been working on the problem for the past 17 years, to find an acceptable solution. With the blessings of the Almighty, we have had a breakthrough, and this led to the month-long series of events that climaxed in the installation on 25th January, 2019.
5. I was not looking to be accorded any special title or accolade, and I was certainly not looking for praise. I did want to do whatever I could to make sure that this long running sore, that was such a blight on Dagbon and Ghana, and which dragged down the development process in our country, could be resolved, and we could move on.
6. We had spent enough emotional stress, enough time, enough energy and enough money on the Dagbon dispute; I wanted that amount of emotion, that time, that energy and that money to be spent on making Dagbon and Ghana prosperous.
7. The Minister for Chieftaincy and Religious Affairs intends to use the momentum of the Dagbon settlement to tackle the other protracted chieftaincy disputes in the country, hopefully, for resolution.
Independence DayIndependence Day
1. In order to reinforce and support the process of reconciliation and the restoration of peace in Dagbon, I have decided that, this year, the 62nd Independence Day celebration will be held in Tamale, on 6th March. This will be the first time in our nation’s history that the celebration is being held outside of our national capital of Accra. I am, very much, looking forward to it.Creation of new regions
1. The creation of the six new regions opens up the country and ensures that no one feels cut off from the centre. No corner of this country is being left behind. It is for this reason that we have created the three development authorities. It is for this reason that we have re-aligned the national budget to ensure that every constituency gets the cedi equivalent of $1 million a year for priority projects.
2. Every member of this House should be able to testify that work is going on in each of the 275 constituencies around the country. The water and toilet provision segment of the Special Development Initiatives is taking place in every constituency.
3. Now that the regions are in place, we have the singular opportunity to avoid the old mistakes of urban planning that have made some of our towns and cities such unattractive places.
4. Indeed, when designating the capitals of the new regions, at the ceremonies at Jubilee House last week, I made it clear that Government is committed to the equitable distribution of government structures and institutions across the regions. We will keep to the commitment.Local Government
1. In addition to the creation of thirty-eight (38) Municipal and District Assemblies, and the elevation of twenty-nine (29) Districts to the status of Municipalities, the Bill for the amendment of article 55(3) of the Constitution has been gazetted, to pave way for the direct, popular election, on partisan basis, of Metropolitan, Municipal and District Chief Executives (MMDCEs).
2. I am calling, respectfully, for a repetition of the bi-partisan support, that made possible the hugely successful outcomes in the referenda for the new regions, to ensure the success of the impending referendum.
3. A multidisciplinary panel of experts is being assembled to plan, cost, schedule and help implement a roadmap for the election of MMDCEs. We are committed to devolving more and more power to the Ghanaian people.Economy
1. I believe we are all now agreed that the fundamentals have to be sound if the economy is to flourish. We have just concluded a programme with the IMF, and, with continuing discipline, we shall sign off from the deal in April. This is the seventeenth time Ghana has had to go to the IMF in the sixty-two years of her independence.
2. Production in the economy, as measured by real GDP growth, has picked up very strongly in the last two years. From 3.4% in 2016, real GDP growth increased to 8.1% in 2017.
3. In 2018, provisional data for the first three quarters indicate a strong real GDP growth of 6.0%, higher than the annual target of 5.6%. Real GDP growth for 2019 is forecast at 7.6%. Ghana’s recent GDP growth has placed it amongst the highest in the world.
4. The fiscal deficit is being brought down from the 7.3% of rebased GDP in 2016 to a provisional 3.9% of GDP at the end of 2018. The debt-to-GDP ratio has declined from the 56.6% of GDP in 2016 to 54.8% at the end of 2018.
5.Inflation has dropped from 15.4%, at the end of 2016, to 9% in January this year, the lowest in six years, as announced by the Ghana Statistical Service last week.
6. Interest rates are declining, and so is the Bank of Ghana Monetary policy rate. Our trade balance account, for the first time in more than a decade, recorded a surplus in 2017, and is expected to remain in surplus.
7. In May 2018, a US$2 billion Eurobond was issued for 30 and 10 years of US$1 billion each with coupon rates of 8.627% and 7.625% respectively, and these were the lowest rate and the longest maturity in our history, signifying confidence in the economy.
8. It comes as no surprise, therefore, that, today, Ghana is the leading recipient of Foreign Direct Investment in West Africa.
9. We will maintain the discipline, and bring progress to our country. We have decided to institute a legal framework to help with the discipline. We have passed the Fiscal Responsibility Law, Act 982, capping the deficit at 5% by law.
10. We know election years will come around, and there will be pressure on government to splurge, and persuasive arguments will be made that you have to stay in government to be able to implement your programmes. However, I am bent on running a responsible administration, mindful of the next generation, and not, merely, the next election.
11. Our efforts are bearing some fruits, and the world has taken notice of the improvement in our economic fundamentals. In September last year, after almost a decade, we received our first Sovereign Credit rating upgrade from Standard and Poor’s (S&P).
12. Revenue mobilization poses the biggest challenge in the management of our economy, with the tax exemption policy in particular proving to be an Achilles heel and a growing menace to fiscal stability and revenue generation.
13. We intend to do something about tax exemptions, by introducing suitable measures that may disrupt the easy and comfortable arrangements that many have become accustomed to, but which we have to take to ensure that we have the firmest of foundations for the economic take-off that has escaped us for so long.Labour
1.Workers in the public sector begun the year on a good note, after receiving a 10% increase in their salaries, on top of the 11% increment of 2018.
2. Forty-one thousand (41,000) workers in the informal sector were also enrolled onto Tier-3 pensions schemes, with pensioners seeing an average increment of 11% in their monthly pension incomes, with the lowest income bracket receiving a 14.7% increment.
3. Last year, the Youth Employment Agency (YEA) engaged some one hundred and seven thousand (107,000) youth in various employment modules, with an additional one hundred and twenty-five thousand (125,000) set to be engaged this year.Child Labour
1. The fight against child labour has chalked some modest success. Through the implementation of the second phase of the National Plan of Action (2017-2021), Ghana has been moved up from the Tier-2 Watch List position of the Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report to Tier-2 in 2018.Ports
1. Government has introduced reforms at the port to improve port efficiency. Among others, we introduced the paperless operations at the ports and goods can be cleared within 1 to 3 days.
2. We have set ourselves the goal of making our ports the most competitive in West Africa. In this regard, some further reforms would soon be announced by Government to enhance the competitive position of Ghana’s ports.Education
1. In September 2019, a new standards-based curriculum will be rolled out from kindergarten to Class 6 in primary schools. This curriculum will focus on making Ghanaian children confident, innovative, creative-thinking, digitally-literate, well-rounded, patriotic citizens. Mathematics, Science, Reading, Writing and Creativity are, therefore, at the heart of this new curriculum.
2. It warms my heart that we are now able to say that education in the public sector is free from Kindergarten to Senior High School, and, that this year, legislation would be passed to redefine basic education to include Senior High School.
3. All is set for the construction of 10 state-of-the-art Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) Centres this year. The new TVET centres would be world class, and attractive to assure young people that they are not being sent to second best options.
4. 10 Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) centres are being built around the country to provide support for the introduction of STEM into basic education after the completion of a successful pilot phase.
5. The importance of science, technology and innovation has led me to appoint a Presidential Advisory Council on Science, Technology and Innovation (PACSTI) to advise the President on how to infuse the application of science and technology in the development of our nation, headed by a distinguished scientist, Prof. Edward Ayensu.
6. We shall bring before Parliament this year, a tertiary education policy Bill that will bring all the public universities under a common law, and make the administration of the public universities less cumbersome.Teachers
1. A well-motivated and remunerated teacher is at the centre of our quality education and comprehensive teacher policy. This has started with the upgrading of the initial teacher education certificate to degree status, and the move to put the teaching profession up there with other professions in terms of respect and exclusivity.
2. With the introduction of the 4-year Bachelor of Education degree, teacher trainees would now obtain their first degree at the end of their schooling. This ensures that they enter the teaching service as university graduates.Health
1. In May 2018, Ghana won accolades at the World Health Assembly for having eradicated Trachoma, an eye disease that has plagued us for a long time.
2. Today, our NHIS is buoyant. Government has paid up the GH¢1.2 billion arrears we inherited, and brought the operations of the NHIS back to life.
3. On 19th December, 2018, the introduction of mobile renewal of membership of the NHIS was launched. Since then, there have been, on average, seventy thousand (70,000) members renewing their membership every week, by dialling *929# on any mobile phone network.
4. Soon, in collaboration with the National Identification Authority, Ghanaians would be able to register, renew and access health care services using the Ghana Card.
5. To deliver healthcare to Ghanaians more efficiently, in 2018, Government granted financial clearance for the recruitment 11,018 health personnel to increase existing clinical staff.
6. To augment the efforts of clinical staff, in September, 2018, the Ministry of Health received further financial clearance to employ 14,254 Nurse Assistants (Clinical and Preventive).
7. The nurse assistants that have been employed belong to the tranche that passed their exams in 2016 from Government Health Training Institutions and have commenced work by 1st February, 2019. The Ministry of Health is working to obtain financial clearance for the recruitment of the 2017 and 2018 graduates.
8. The health delivery system will be significantly strengthened by the expected arrival in June of 275 ambulances, i.e. one per constituency, to make treatment of emergency cases more effective.
9. Drone technology has also been introduced into the health delivery system to deliver essential medicine, blood and blood products to remote communities.
10. We still face problems of inadequate infrastructure in our health establishments. We have problems of numerous structures at various stages of completion that cannot be finished and brought into use, because newer structures are being started, and there is no money to finish the ones started earlier. We will not ignore or sweep the problem under the carpet. We are dealing with it, and will complete them.HOUSING
1. We are starting with the completion of the many abandoned projects dotted around the country. A consortium of local banks has raised 51 million dollars to fund the completion of the social housing units started by the Kufuor administration in 2006 at Koforidua, Tamale and Ho.
2. The Saglemi Housing Project, started under the last NDC government, is also high on our list of priorities this year. The five thousand (5,000) units it offers would boost our housing numbers. We are, therefore, establishing the value for money issues surrounding the project in order to reconcile the number of houses built with the schedule of payments made, and accelerate delivery.
3. The 2019 budget made provision for the construction of two hundred thousand (200,000) housing units, and a database of local and foreign developers has been created to help make this policy a reality.
4. There are many well-intentioned projects that ended up pricing out the low-income earners, who were supposed to be their beneficiaries. We are determined to learn the lessons from past projects. The Ministry of Finance is working to launch a one billion Ghana cedi housing fund that would target low-income earners.
5. Government will continue with the other housing projects for the police, armed forces and government workers across the country, through agencies like the State Housing Corporation.
6. The most exciting news on the housing landscape, though, is the drafting of plans to regenerate Nima, which holds the dubious title of being Accra’s first slum. I am a proud resident of Nima myself, and I am extremely excited that the regeneration plans will not dislodge or dispossess residents, but would rather transform Nima into a well-laid out residential area with full amenities.DRAINAGE
1. The Odawna Storm Drains in Accra, which have caused many tragedies over the years, are now being reengineered by a team of experts who will give it a permanent fix.
2. The Dichemso Drainage System is also on our list of priorities, and a bid has been put out for experts to transform it into a more efficient system.COASTAL PROTECTION PROJECTS
1. Our ongoing coastal protection projects are proceeding in Adjoa in the Western Region, Blekusu, New Takoradi phase II (Elmina), Dansoman, Axim and Dixcove.
2. This year, we will also begin others in Amanful Kumah, Dansoman phase II, Komenda, Anomabo, Cape Coast, Mensah Guinea, Ningo Prampram, New Takoradi Phase III, Apam, Kokrobite, Bortianor, Blekusu Phase II and Aboadze-Shama Phase II, Maritime University, Nungua, Takoradi, Anyanui and Essipong.BAGRE DAM SPILLAGE
1. In the short-term, desilting of the White Volta will be undertaken this year, in conjunction with discussions with the Burkinabes to regulate the flow of the spillage of the Bagre Dam, and mitigate its impact.
2. The Ministry of Works and Housing will, in the coming week, receive a report on a feasibility study conducted by the Chinese company, SinoHydro, for the construction of a dam at Pwalugu, to serve as a receptacle to hold the volume of water spilled from the Bagre Dam for irrigation purposes, and also for the generation of electricity. This will be the permanent solution to the Bagre Dam problem.PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
1. If there has been any Government that has been on the side of Persons with Disabilities, it is my Government. We have increased the share of the District Assemblies Common Fund to Persons with Disabilities from 2% to 3%, and we have also ensured the implementation of our pledge of employing 50% of the persons who manage the country’s toll booths from amongst Persons with Disabilities.CREATIVE ARTS
1. We have worked to finalise the Creative Arts Bill, leading to the setting up of the Creative Arts Fund. For the first time, in 2018, Government provided support to the Creative Arts Council, and the Creative Arts Masterclass, to build capacity of Creative Arts practitioners, has also commenced.
2. The Eastern Regional Theatre has been completed, and work is currently ongoing towards the construction of the Kumasi theatre.TOURISM
1. We are making a special effort from now onwards to attract tourists into our country. Under the See Ghana, Eat Ghana, Wear Ghana and Feel Ghana campaign, the Ghana Tourism Authority recorded a 20% growth since its launch to over six hundred thousand visitations to various tourist sites.
2. The World Bank has approved a US$40 million grant to support the Tourism Ministry and its agencies to help upgrade tourist facilities.
3. Training across the entire tourism sector is also receiving priority. The Hospitality Training Institute has been renovated, and re-opened in July 2018 to provide needed training in the hospitality and tourism sectors.
4. Under a Tourism Attractions Upgrade Project, several tourist sites, including Elmina Heritage Bay, Axim Fort St. Antonio, Assin Manso Slave River, Tetteh Quarshie Cocoa Farm, Bunso Arboretum, Kintampo Water Falls, are undergoing upgrades.
5. In this “Year of Return”, when we have invited the world to visit, I would urge each one of us to make a special effort to make a visit to our country a memorable one. Our music, our foods, our clothes and the quintessential akwaaba smile will make a visitor to our country come back again and again.SANITATION
1. We have witnessed an increase in the coverage of solid waste management, from 16.6% to 53%, and, over the course of last year, thirty-five thousand, eight hundred and sixty-two (35,862) household toilets were built, as opposed to one thousand, six hundred and ninety-eight (1,698) in 2016. We will intensify efforts at making Accra a clean city.
2. In 2019, apart from continuing with educating and sensitizing people, we intend to use the bye-laws to enforce cleanliness. The Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Sanitation are working together to try sanitation offences.
3. Persons who litter would be tried and punished, and so would those who steal litter bins from our streets.
4. We are launching a National Sanitation Brigade to help us carry this out, and, through this vehicle, we will not only keep our towns and cities clean, but will also provide jobs for our young people.WASTE RECYCLING
1. A vibrant recycling industry in Ghana could recover nearly one million tonnes of waste plastics from the environment and landfills annually, to be recycled into basic-need products valued at GH¢2 billion per year, creating many jobs across the economy.
2. Currently, extensive discussions are being concluded with investors on the most sustainable options available to rid Ghana of this plastic filth menace.
3. The National E-waste Program has been launched. An External Service Provider (SGS) will verify, assess and collect the advance recycle eco fee on all electrical and electronic equipment from all exporting countries, and also to establish a state-of-the-art recycling facility at Agbogbloshie, whose construction will begin in April.
4. Not only would we solve the problem of waste disposal in an environmentally-friendly manner, setting up the recycling facility will lead to the creation of over twenty thousand (20,000) direct jobs, through the establishment of associated holding centres in each regional capital and collection centres in each district.OPEN DEFECATION
1. It is absolutely imperative that we make a success of our One House-One-Toilet Policy. The Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) Programme is being implemented in over four thousand, five hundred (4,500) communities in one hundred and thirty (130) districts to achieve Open Defecation Free (ODF) Communities.ENERGY
1. I am happy to announce that gas production tripled during the year, from 100 to 300 million cubic feet per day.
2. The Ministry of Energy is undertaking steps to remove the transmission bottlenecks, to ensure that Ghanaian gas can reach power plants located in the eastern part of the country, and I am confident that, by August this year, the situation would have been fully remedied to ensure Ghana uses locally produced gas for the bulk of its thermal power generation, saving substantial amounts of foreign exchange on imported fuels.
3. To reduce government’s expenditure on utilities, and also promote the use of solar power for government and public buildings, the Ministry of Energy initiated the Solar Rooftop Programme. The Ministry is leading by example with the installation of a 65-kilowatt solar rooftop system at its premises.
4. Jubilee House will also be powered, as from August this year, by solar energy, as an example to other public institutions.
5. In fact, government’s target is to install up to 200 megawatts of distributed solar power by 2030 in both residential and non-residential facilities in order to reduce Government’s liabilities to ECG.
6. There has been good news with the recent announcement by Aker Energy of one of the biggest oil finds in Africa. Mr Speaker, this has led me to think that an NPP government must be good for Ghana.
7. After many, many years of our looking and almost giving up, it took an NPP government to discover oil in 2007. In eight years of NDC administration, 13 oil block deals were signed, and not a single one was developed. The first one signed in 2017, under my government, which was Aker, has led to the second biggest oil discovery in Africa.
8. On the fight against corruption in the oil industry, and to aid transparency, we have established a National Register of Contracts on which all the Petroleum Agreements signed by the Government have been published. This provides a platform for citizens to scrutinize the oil contracts signed by government, and accords with the international call for contract transparency.
9. We have also passed the General Petroleum Regulations, which provide for the disclosure of beneficial ownership information of companies operating in Ghana’s oil and gas industry. This will ensure that people do not hide in the shadows to appropriate oil blocks to themselves, at the expense of the citizens of Ghana.
10. The interest of major oil companies in Ghana has become dramatic. Today, oil companies such as the American giant, ExxonMobil, and the Norwegian conglomerate, Aker, have signed petroleum exploration agreements with Ghana.
11. Through the launch of the “GHANA OIL AND GAS LICENSING ROUNDS 2018”, the bidding process for the allocation of new petroleum rights to prospective investors, the first such exercise in our history, other global players such as BP, CNOOC Group and Total have expressed interest in coming to Ghana.BUSINESS DEV’T & ENTREPRENEURSHIP
1. Under the Presidential Support programme, one thousand, three hundred and fifty (1,350) start-ups and small businesses have benefitted from a special government business support programme. Beneficiaries received between ten thousand (GH¢10,000) and one hundred thousand Ghana cedis (GH¢100,000) each, at a special interest rate of 10%, instead of the average prevailing market rate of 26%.
2. The Presidential Support programme is designed to help grow and expand businesses of beneficiaries, and will create about thirty thousand (30,000) direct jobs. Eighteen thousand (18,000) jobs have already been created under this programme.TRADE & INDUSTRY
1. Already established businesses are also receiving help, with an amount of two hundred and thirty million Ghana cedis (GH¢230 million) being disbursed among sixteen (16) companies under the stimulus package. This has led to the creation of eight thousand, five hundred (8,500) to ten thousand (10,000) direct and indirect jobs.
2. Proof, if some were needed that we are getting something right, and generating the right atmosphere to attract foreign business, has come with the announcement that three major international automobile manufacturers, Volkswagen, Nissan and Sinotruck have signed MOUs to establish assembling plants in our country.
3. Renault is also conducting feasibility studies on establishing an assembly plant in Ghana, as is Toyota.
4. We will outdoor, in March, the National Automotive Policy spelling out the terms, conditions and incentive package for participating in Ghana’s new automobile industry, which will also apply to indigenous car assembly companies.
5. The local textile industry has been granted a zero-rated VAT on the supply of locally-made textiles for a period of three years.
6. We have put in place a tax stamp regime for both locally manufactured and imported textiles to address the challenge of pirated designs and logos in the textile trade.
7. The Tema Port has been designated as a Single-Entry Corridor for the importation of textile prints, with a textile taskforce in place to ensure effective compliance.
8. The “One-District-One-Factory” policy has taken off, and 79 factories under the scheme are at various stages of operation or construction. Another 35 are going through credit appraisal.
9. Under the Rural Enterprises Programme, funded by the African Development Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, 50 small-scale processing factories will be established by the end of the year in 50 districts across the country, particularly in areas where there is evidence of significant post-harvest losses.MASLOC
1. MASLOC has been revamped, and is getting back to do what it was set up to do. There has been strict adherence to credit procedures and prudent management of the credit recovery process. These have resulted in a recovery rate of 89% of loans administered under a pilot scheme introduced in 2017.
2. MASLOC was given an amount of GH¢35 million in October 2018 for disbursement. This is the first time an amount of such magnitude has been given to the Centre outside of an election year.
3. So far, 87% of the monies disbursed from MASLOC have gone to women, i.e. to 24,582 women. The 2016 NPP Manifesto promised to allocate 50% of MASLOC funds to women, and we have surpassed this promise.
4. Interesting things are happening at the successfully restructured MASLOC, and that is why the Centre was allocated an amount of GH¢200 million in the 2019 budget. Such an amount is unprecedented in the history of MASLOC.
5. In 2019, MASLOC will give increased attention to youth start-up businesses in vegetable farming, poultry, piggery and fish farming.BANKING SECTOR
1. The woes of the banking sector have also been a case of long-standing bad practices that we, previously, had been unable or unwilling to deal with, which we are now having to deal with in the most painful manner.
2. The clean-up of the banking sector has cost the national treasury GH¢12.7 billion. It was necessary to sanitise the sector, minimise job losses, and protect deposits of 1,147,366 Ghanaians and their businesses and the people they employed.
3. In all this, I have been anxious that our local banks are helped and given as much support as possible, but l will not be on the side of criminal behaviour if that is discovered. I would urge that we are all patient for the investigations to be made in a calm manner.MENZGOLD
1. The MenzGold debacle is a tragic phenomenon that appears to have occurred in plain sight, and affected a lot of people, in spite of warnings from official institutions.
2. As the authorities try to unravel the intricacies of what happened (in the MenzGold saga), I admonish all Ghanaians to learn the necessary lessons for the future, even as State institutions work to bring a resolution to the matter, and those who are seen to have indulged in criminal activities, are brought to justice.
3. The existence of a body such as the newly inaugurated Presidential Financial Stability Advisory Council would have forestalled the emergence of the Menzgold saga, and will make it difficult, in future, for any such scheme to get off the ground.AGRICULTURE
1. Thanks to the programme for “Planting for Food and Jobs”, admirably organised by that outstanding Minister for Agriculture, Dr. Owusu Afriyie Akoto, this House stands informed, that, in 2018, exports of food crops such as cassava, rice, yellow and white maize, soya, plantain, cowpea and yam were made FROM Ghana to Burkina Faso, Togo and Cote d’Ivoire in considerable quantities.
2. We had a bumper harvest of produce, and, last year, we did not import a single grain of maize.FISHERIES
1. The Aquaculture for Food and Jobs will be implemented for three years, from 2019 to 2021, in collaboration with the Nation Builders Corps (NABCO) and the School Feeding Programme. It is expected to create 7,000 jobs, and add an extra 33,628 metric tonnes of fish to our domestic fish production. Piloting of the AFJ has already started at the James Camp Prison.
2. Government will collaborate with the private sector to facilitate the provision of 5,000 outboard motors and 55,250 bales of prescribed fishing gears through the fisheries associations.
3. To promote the effective and efficient distribution of premix fuel, we will continue to use the premix fuel tracking system, and audit landing beaches, measures which have ensured that, since November 2018, there has been no report of premix diversion, a marked improvement from the past.
4. US$185 million loan money has been earmarked for the construction of twelve (12) landing sites and two (2) fishing harbours in some selected fishing communities in the country.  Phase I will kick off in March at Axim, Mumford, Winneba and Teshie.
5. Recently, I cut the sod to commence work at the Jamestown Harbour Complex, which, like the development of Elmina Fishing Harbour, is part of our plans for the fishing sector in 2019.MINING
1. The ban on small scale mining has now been lifted, but not on galamsey. Some of our water bodies have shown remarkable signs of rejuvenation. River Ankobra, for example, looks restored to life; indeed, some fish have even been seen in the Ankobra for the first time in a long while.
2. We intend, for example, to mine, at long last, our bauxite deposits in order to establish an integrated aluminium industry in Ghana. The Ghana Integrated Aluminium Development Corporation, a statutory corporation, has been set up, with the support of Parliament, to spearhead Government’s commitment to create an integrated aluminium industry.
3. A data centre, the first of its kind, now exists at the Minerals Commission, which will allow prospective investors and partners to access every information regarding the bauxite deposits and the aluminium industry. The Minerals Commission is in the course of creating an equivalent data centre for our iron ore deposits.GHANA ARMED FORCES
1. The Ghana Armed Forces assisted the National Security to embark on OPERATION ROADSTAR, and as a result a 40-cre cattle ranch has been constructed to accommodate over six thousand (6,000) cattle at Wawase, in Afram Plains, and reducing, considerably, the tensions in the area with the nomadic herdsmen.
There are plans to replicate these ranches in other parts of the country.
2. Government is pleased to have fulfilled its promise to the Military Personnel by increasing the United Nations Peacekeeping Troops contribution allowances from $30.00 TO $35.00 per soldier per day. And as promised, we will continue to pay the troops regularly at the operational areas.
3. Tomorrow, I will be presenting to the Ghana Armed Forces 50 ANKAI Buses, the first tranche of the 138 Staff and Operational Vehicles of various categories, and 26 dispatch motorcycles. This year, we will provide the Army with 30 Otokar Armored Personnel Carriers (APC), and 6 Fast Patrol Boats for the Navy.
4. We will also provide improved training facilities by transforming the Military Academy into a World Class Institution, and expand the housing project from six 16 flats to 44, and begin constructing 160 2-bedroom apartments across the country.
5. This year, we will also complete and commission the 500-bed Military Hospital in the Ashanti Region, and begin the third phase of this project.
6. The amendment of LI 1332, which is seeking to change the length of service of the men and women of the other ranks of the Ghana Armed Forces from 25 to 30 years and the associated career progression plan, has been reviewed, laid and passed by Parliament, and will be implemented this year as planned.POLICE SERVICE
1. We have been busy this past year supplying the police with equipment, cars, motorbikes, drones and other vital policing equipment. Financial clearance has been given, and they are in the process of recruiting up to 4,000 men and women into the service.JUDICIARY
2. It is obvious that most of the lower courts are not fit for purpose, and we must provide suitable structures for our law courts. Discussions on how to raise the money are currently ongoing, and I am optimistic that a solution will be found.ATTORNEY GENERAL
1. I am pleased to note that there appears to have been a marked change in the Ministry of Justice. No longer do we have people bringing frivolous claims against the State because they know the case will not be defended, and they will get judgement debts.RTI BILL
1. I am happy to state that, as you know, Parliament has virtually completed its deliberations on the Right To Information Bill, and that, any moment from now, the nation will hear the news of its passage. I will, happily, give my assent to it as soon as it is brought to my table.FOREIGN AFFAIRS
1. Ghana remains an active player in international affairs, especially in the region of West Africa and on the continent of Africa. Ghana’s voice is loud and clear on issues at international fora. Good neighbourliness underpins our foreign policy and we try to be at peace with all. I have been intimately involved in trying to find a resolution to the difficulties in Togo, and we hope that they are coming to an end.ROADS
1. Everybody has by now heard about the arrangements we have made with the Chinese company, Sinohydro, and it is a matter of great relief to me that I am able to say that work will now be starting on the roads that have been designated to be part of that project. It is worth stating that we are very much aware that there are many more roads that do not come under the SinoHydro deal, which are also in a bad way and we continue to seek ways to build a road network worthy of our nation.RAILWAYS
1. I am glad to be able to report that the Accra to Tema railway service has started running on the refurbished line.
2. The opening of the Accra/Nsawam line has been postponed, because sand winners have undermined the ground underneath the track near Pokuase. It is now being repaired, and the service will start hopefully by the end of February.
3. If we want the railways to work, we would all have to take an interest in and stop the activities of encroachers on the railway lands.
4. The rehabilitation of the narrow-gauge line will continue from Nsawam to Koforidua. Work is continuing on the rehabilitation of the Kojokrom to Tarkwa section of the Western line, whilst work on the standard gauge section from Kojokrom to Manso is ongoing.
5. Government is committing an extra one billion US dollars to the development of the new railway network. Five hundred million dollars ($500 million) will be applied to the development of the Western line, and five hundred million dollars ($500 million) will be applied to the first phase of the Kumasi to Paga section of the national network.
6. The development of the Tema/Ouagadougou railway line is also progressing steadily. Twelve shortlisted companies have been invited to proceed to the next stage of the procurement process. This year, land acquisition will commence beyond the Volta River at Mpakadan, and the strategic investor will be selected.AVIATION
1. Operations at the Kumasi, Tamale, Takoradi airports have been revamped, with the resurgence in domestic airline operations through the introduction of domestic operators like Unity Air and Passion Air. Soon, the flag of Ghana will be flown again, as we have identified strategic investors to launch a Home-Based Carrier.COMMUNICATIONS
1. Mobile telephony has almost covered the entire country, and broadband internet connectivity is available in many places.
2. There are 1.2 million registered and verified addresses through the National Digital Property Addressing System; in other words, we have joined the modern world, and gradually leaving the right turn at the blue kiosk, and opposite the Kofi-broke-man seller.
3. People are able to renew their National Health Insurance cards in minutes in the comfort of their own homes. You can now renew your driving licence, and register a car in half an hour, register your business online, and acquire a passport in a week without any of the difficulties that used to come with trying to get any of these things done.
4. The National Identification card, the Ghana Card, has been issued to people in government departments and members of the security services, and, this year, the rest of the population will be registered and receive their cards. We are determined to join the digital world.SPORTS
Ghana won, last year, the bid to host the 13th All Africa Games. It presents our nation with the opportunity to upgrade sporting infrastructure in the country, and position our nation as a preferred destination for the development of sporting disciplines on the continent.
We have begun renovating and upgrading our sporting infrastructure such as the Accra and Cape Coast Sports Stadia, and the Azumah Nelson Sports Complex in Kaneshie, and a complete refurbishment of sports facilities across the country.
Funds have also been released for the completion of the University of Ghana Sports Stadium, started by the Kufuor-led NPP Government, but abandoned soon after 2009.
The Ghanaian people are also expectant of a return to normalcy of all football-related activities as soon as possible, and the Normalization Committee is working to ensure that they meet the March deadline.VIGILANTISM
1. I could have sat it out, as some did, for Akwatia, Atiwa, Chereponi, Talensi and Amenfi West, but I decided that that would not be in the interest of Ghanaian democracy. The time has come to put an end to the phenomenon of politically-related violence.
2. The only way in our system to begin to deal with politically-related violence is through the work of a Commission of Inquiry. I hope the findings and recommendations of the Emile Short Commission will enable us chart a path to ending politically-related violence in our country.
3. The events of last Monday, in Kumasi, where a meeting of the national and regional executives of the opposition National Democratic Congress was broken up by acts of violence, leading to the tragic death of a citizen, have reinforced the urgent need for us to find that path.
4. I want to use the platform of this Message to make a sincere, passionate appeal to the leaders of the two main political parties in our country, NPP and NDC, to come together, as soon as possible, preferably next week, to agree on appropriate measures to bring an end to this worrying and unacceptable phenomenon of vigilantism in our body politic.
5. I have asked the leadership of the NPP to extend an invitation to the leadership of the NDC for such a meeting on vigilantism. The security services of the country will be on standby to assist this meeting.
6. If voluntary disbandment by the parties is not feasible, then I will initiate legislation on the matter. Vigorous debate and the exchange of ideas should be the true basis of political dialogue and competition in our country, not the activities of party vigilante groups.
7. What was tolerated over the years cannot and must not be accepted anymore.  We must not take our peace and security for granted— not for a moment. Our children and grandchildren will not forgive us if we were to compromise our peace and stability.  I will not permit that to occur under my watch."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"59"	2019-02-14	" The much-awaited Right to Information Bill, when passed, will take effect only in the 2020 financial year.
 This follows an amendment proposed by the majority leader and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu on Wednesday.
 Financial provision for the implementation of an RTI law had not been made in the 2019 budget.
 That, according to Mensah Bonsu, makes the implementation of the RTI bill when passed into law improbable.
 “So I guess what we could do is to say that the act shall come into effect in the 2020 financial year,” he stated on the floor of Parliament.
 “We need to train information officers. We need to have information officers allocated or in some cases constructed.
 “So we’ll urge government then that if there will be any supplementary estimates some allocations should be made to start this in earnest so that into the next financial year which is 2020, we shall have a full-scale implementation of the right to information bill,” he added.
 Mensah Bonsu’s position was unanimously accepted by the House.
 The Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Aaron Mike Ocquaye, December last year asked civil society groups to “leave” parliament alone to finish work on the RTI Bill.
 According to Prof. Ocquaye, Parliament has completed 80% of work on the bill and will pass it by February 2019.
 The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year.
 It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
 The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"60"	2019-02-14	" Daily Statesman:
 * New Regions, better access for all - Says President
 * NPP condemns Salaga violence; demands probe to punish culprits
 * Renaming of Ho Technical University put on hold
 * NGO fights Minority MPs over 'bloody widow' attackGhanaian Times:
 * Goaso, Techiman get nod as capitals of Ahafo, Bono East regions
 * Ghanaians celebrate Val's Day today
 * Parliament halts passage of RTI Bill
 * Presidential Fiscal Responsibility Advisory Council inauguratedDaily Graphic:
 * Double-track system: SHS 2 students exit next academic year - Dr Adutwum
 * Ahafo, Bono East receive legal backing
 * Let's unite against vigilantism - IGP appeals to Ghanaians"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"61"	2019-02-08	" Embattled Zylofon Media PRO, Sammy Baah also known as Sammy Flex has bemoaned of the fake and junk stories written by bloggers.
 Over the years, there has been constant backlash aimed at bloggers due to the belief of a cross section of the Ghanaian populace that they always produce junk stories for the readers.
 According to Sammy Baah Flex who in the wake of the many fake and junk stories on the internet by some bloggers has sent out a reply to such critics.
 Giving his opinion in a post on Twitter, Sammy was of the view that bloggers are not to be blamed for this perceived problem.
 In his opinion, they (bloggers) on numerous occasions try to get more serious information from people who have it, to put out there but usually, their efforts are thwarted.
 “#myopinion. Blame not bloggers for writing junk stories. Blame those with information in the creative arts space who refuse to share cos they are not answerable to any one. Our game seems joke cos those with serious information won’t even pick your calls. Politics wins everyday?,” he wrote.
 He, therefore, called on the people who want to apportion blame to do so but make sure it is directed to the right quarters as a call on the parliament of Ghana to strive harder in their quest and pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI bill) which has been in and out of the honourable house over the years."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"62"	2019-02-07	" The constant backlash received by the print media in Ghana, especially bloggers because of the belief of a cross section of the Ghanaian populace that they are always churning out some junk stories out there for the readers has caused celebrated media personality, Sammy Baah Flex to send out a sweet reply to such critics.
 In a post of the embattled Zylofon Media PRO sighted by zionfelix.net on Twitter, he makes the point that bloggers are not to be blamed for this perceived problem. In his opinion, they (bloggers) on numerous occasions try to get more serious information from people who have it, to put out there but usually, their efforts are thwarted.
 The Flex Newspaper boss, therefore, called on the people who want to apportion blame to do so but make sure it is directed to the right quarters. The right quarters Sammy started as the people who have the information but fail to pick up their calls anytime they even call them to demand it.
 This post is certainly a call on the parliament of Ghana to strive harder in their quest and pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI bill) which has been in and out of the honorable house over the years.
 Check out Sammy Flex’ full post below:"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"63"	2019-02-06	" Morning vibes.
 It is another beautiful morning on the Class 91.3 FM Executive Breakfast Show and I am sitting in our sanguine studio with a relentless focus on shifting the political order away from the establishment, slapping the table to emphasise my points!
 “We need to create a safe environment and ensure that sole traders and businesses feel they can get on, they can plan, they can invest, they can grow without the fear of robbery, assault and even in certain grave circumstances, murder!” I tell Benjamin Akakpo.
 We are halfway through the Class 91.3 FM Executive Breakfast Show and have been engaging the public about safety and security this morning. I’ve been sufficiently angered by our security institutions so much that I consciously, against a personal principle of uncensored freedom of expression, contain my raging sentiments to keep my on-air contributions decorous.
 I suddenly notice the producer struggling to signal the host, Benjamin Akakpo; he is throwing his hands about in the air, as though his favourite football club had just netted a screamer in the dying minutes of a cup final, and finally grabs Benjamin’s attention. The Minister of Information, Kojo Oppong Nkrumah MP, called-in shortly after that to join the vibrant discussion.
 As usual, Akakpo fired away with the most sweetly-worded tough and relevant questions. But the media savvy Kojo, having himself been the darling of the 4th realm until his political baptism in 2016, took great care to avoid any damaging headline stories while answering questions.
 I admit that his statements were distinctly diplomatic and, at best, a decent lesson on public relations. But having heard him wind up on the issue regarding the successes of the current administration, I am having second thoughts. Ironically, he refused to speak on the alleged 41 achievements detailed by the Vice-President, Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia. He was clearly not well-prepped; demonstrating a lack of in-depth knowledge on national matters. He was also sceptical of the numbers that have been widely reported by the media with regards to some alleged 7,000 Ghanaians earmarked for deportation from the United States. Kojo was all at sea, never to recover.Right to Information Bill. 
 It is the third year of the Akufo-Addo led administration and, with an elephantine parliamentary majority, the government can still not claim the bragging rights to passing the Right to Information Bill (RTI). Everyone seems to agree that the grand task for Kojo over the next two years is whether or not he can unite parliament and convince his colleagues to pass the bill, within the shortest possible time. If it does not, the government cannot say it has delivered.
 I am predicting a long, rainy season of discontent for Kojo Oppong Nkrumah if he cannot get the bill through the august house, where it is being sabotaged, and onto the statute book to settle the decades-long pending passage. The argument that this undue delay has largely abetted corruption in the 4th Republic is increasingly dominating public opinion. And rightfully so. Would he make history or would he just be responsible for spending the millions that the President has allocated for propaganda leading up to the 2020 election?"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"64"	2019-02-04	"Daily Graphic
-Lapses in lecturers' qualifications exposed - National Council for Tertiary Education report
-Nana Akufo-Addo on three-nation visit
-Ministry disappointed by US visa restrictions
-3 shareholders of defunct uniBank urge court to join AG to suit Ghanaian Times
-Ghana responds to US: Visa sanctions unjustified
-Commey wins IBF World Title, stops Chaniev in Round 2
-Nana Akufo-Addo leaves for 8-day working visit to South Africa, US, Ethiopia
-Catholic Bishops, Peace Council condemn violence at Ayawaso Daily Guide
-NDC Gurus storm EC, charge on Jean Mensa
-Akim Swedru suspected kidnapper grabbed 
-Otumfuo hails Free SHS 
-Government fights US visa ban
-Police hunt Ayawaso shootersGoldstreet Business
-First ever 6-year T-Bond issued
-Government plans US$403m bond issued for GAT 
-Insuring public jittery over recapitalisation plans Ghanaian Observer
-No party can beat the NDC in unleashing violence - Mahama
-Peace Council, others chastise John Dramani Mahama 
-Nana Akufo-Addo condemns 'isolated violence' at Ayawaso West Wuogon
-Ghana fights US over visa brouhaha Economy Times
-Banks to drop interest rates 
-Commodity prices fluctuate 
-COCOBOD hopeful of achieving 900,000mt target for 2019Finder
-China's $20m for 1,029 boreholes 
-Coalition demands further amendments to RTI Bill
-Hussein-Suale's funeral set for Feb 7 and 8
-US, Ghana in tussle over 7,000 Ghanaians marked for deportationB&F
-GH¢45.4bn tax revenue target to be revised 
-Import revenue up by 3.9%
-New €1.5bn EU credit guarantee to boost investment in Africa"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"65"	2019-01-31	"Stories making headlines on the front pages in the major newspapers include:Daily Graphic:
* Ayawaso West Wuogon by-election today; Voters register not bloated - EC assures parties 
* Kennedy Agyapong, Muntaka Mubarak clash in Parliament
* Man has sex with 3 stepdaughters; impregnates one
* Interdiction of Lance Corporal Agodzi to be lifted Ghanaian Times:
* Govt to roll out projects across the country this year - Akufo-Addo  announces 
* Ayawaso West Wuogon goes to the polls today
* Near exchange of blows in Parliament between Kennedy Agyapong and Alhaji Muntaka 
* 'Father' sleeps with 3 stepdaughters Daily Guide:
* Police invite Kennedy over Anas boy's murder; speaks to BBC
* NDC Ayawaso ploy exposed
* NPP Council of Elders elect officers 
* We won't go back to IMF - Akufo-AddoB&FT:
* Technical varsities still unattractive 2 years after conversion
* Deposits growth rate slows down - BoG report
* Scrap vehicle levy - VADAG to Govt  Daily Heritage:
* Ken, Muntaka trade verbal blows in Parliament over Ahmed Hussein-Suale 
* Danger: Children turn exposed transformer into playground
* Tension mounts at CMB lorry station 
* All set for Ayawaso West Wuogon by-election Chronicle:
* Agyapong, Muntaka in warm up match in the Chamber
* NDC warns 'political contractors' 
* NDC bloated register claim bogus - EC
* RTI Bill now ready for 3rd reading Business Finder:
* Diversify fund sources to cover shortfalls from pension funds - Experts to GAT 
* Republic Bank clears air on HFC Capital Partners LimitedCustodian:
* Jumpy NDC exposed in fraud as NPP's Lydia is poised for Ayawaso victory today
* We have clean register for elections - EC to NDC
* EOCO shuts down Zylofon FM and TV 
* Ken, Muntaka trade insults"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"66"	2019-01-30	" The Minority in Parliament on Wednesday accused government of sabotaging the yet-to-be-passed Right to Information bill into law.
 The allegation of the opposition National Democratic Congress (NDC) MPs stems from the introduction of an amendment by Suhum MP Frederick Opare Ansah for a 12-month implementation clause after the passage of the bill.
 Mr Hammond argued government will need that grace period to put its acts in order.
 The proposal was, however, vehemently opposed by the minority MPs.
 Speaking to Starr News, former Deputy Attorney General and a member of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament Dr Dominic Ayine said the government is manipulating the majority to make the RTI law toothless.
 He said: “There’s no rational basis why we should delay the passage of the bill or say that we have passed it but we want to delay its implementation for 12 months. In the interim what’s going to happen? Is it the case that the bureaucracy will now have to prepare itself, to open itself up to a transparent manner that’s required by the bill? Is that what the proponent of that amendment is saying?”
 He urged the majority to reject the proposal saying “if they are afraid that in the 12 months the government will be exposed because there’ll be a request for information that’ll expose them they should just let us know.”
 He stated that he suspected that “there’s an intention to delay the RTI in other for the government to operate in the manner that it is operating now without any scrutiny.”
 Chairman for the Committee Ben Abdallah, however, disagreed. The Offinso South MP argued that a delay in the implementation of the RTI bill will not hurt anybody after waiting for such a law for 20 years.
 He, however, disclosed leadership of Parliament has been tasked to consider the amendment before consideration of the bill resumes.
 The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by Ghana’s 1992 Constitution and ratified as a right under International Conventions on Human rights. It was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament.
 The bill was presented to Parliament on February 5, 2010, but has since not been passed despite undergoing a countless number of amendments. The delay in the passage of the bill has attracted many groups in recent times including the Media coalition on RTI to exert torrid pressure on Parliament to pass the bill before it rises."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"67"	2019-01-29	" Parliament is set to prioritise some three crucial bills as it begins its first sitting of the year.
 The bills include the age-old Right to Information Bill, the Affirmative Action Bill and the Code of Conduct Bill.
 The bills are expected to be debated extensively and passed in the coming days.
 Class91.3FM’s parliamentary correspondent, Ekow Annan, reported that while giving his opening remarks on the resumption of the house from the Christmas break on Tuesday, 29 January 2019, the Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Mike Oquaye noted that the legislature will be venturing into a profit-generating business by constructing a hotel to make money for the house.
 While reiterating the commitment of the house to pass the RTI bill, Majority Leader Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu said the work done on it so far cannot be attributed to pressure from civil society groups or well-meaning Ghanaians.
 For his part, Minority Leader Haruna Iddrisu urged the legislators to be punctual and diligent in the discharge of their duties."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"68"	2019-01-23	"The recent spate of kidnappings in the Western Region is being motivated by the oil boom in that part of Ghana, Major Osaahene Kojo Boakye-Djan (Rtd), the former spokesperson for the defunct Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC), has said.
 The former military officer has, therefore, suggested that the police strengthen their intelligence network to combat the growing spate of abductions.
 Recently, three girls have been kidnapped in the Regional Capital, Takoradi.
 Nigerian-born Samuel Wilson Udoterg was arrested for allegedly masterminding the kidnapping of Ruth and many other teenage girls.
 Speaking in an interview with Kwabena Prah Jnr. (The Don) on Ghana Yensom on Accra100.5FM, Wednesday, 23 January 2019, Major Boakye-Djan (Rtd), said: “It is economic in nature and the solution lies in information or intelligence gathering. Why is it in the Western Region and not in Oti Region or Northern Region?
 “Because that is where our oil money is coming from. All the big boys are in the Western Region.”
 He further stated that: “The government of the day must be held responsible for what is going on. At the heart of what is going on is the lack of processed information and intelligence that could lead to a conviction.
 “Why have we not been able to pass the RTI Bill? People should march to the presidency and demand answers.\"
 “If the RTI Bill is passed and is processed properly, it will help in intelligence gathering. This is not the ultimate solution but it is a good beginning of some good steps to take.”"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"69"	2019-01-06	"The Member of Parliament for Mampong in the Ashanti region, Kweku Ampratwum-Sarpong has said he is not comfortable with the eventual passage of the Right to Information Bill.
He said if passed into law, the media in Ghana will see it as a safe haven and a refuge to  abuse the purpose and its diligent usage. The Mampong MP added that, members of the inky fraternity in Ghana extremely act beyond the confinement of their daily duties, and passing the RTI bill into law will be tantamount to arming the media with a sophisticated weapon to haunt decent Ghanaians.
Kweku Ampratwum-Sarpong expressed his lack of interest for the RTI bill to be passed into law during a live interview with Kofi Marfo, known in broadcasting as Sir Richie, on a London based Ghanaian radio station ,Hot digital radio on Sunday.
The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights. The bill will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society”.
The bill was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament until 2010.
During the latter part of 2018, Majority Leader, Osei Kyei-Mensah- Bonsu, gave the assurance that the House would pass the RTI Bill into law before it rises in December, 2018 which was again frustrated by Members of Parliament.
It is believed around 30 to 50 MP's out of the 275 show interest in the RTI bill."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"70"	2018-12-29	"The last edition of Newsfile for 2018 promises to stand out as the most topical issues of the year are discussed. 
The topics to be discussed include Menzgold saga and the banking sector reforms, corruption and the Right To Information Bill.
The first segment of the programme will feature guests such as Bright Simons, Kojo Anan Ankomah, Clara Beeri and Amanda Clinton to talk on the Menzgold and financial sector reforms. 
Customers of Menzgold have threatened to vote out the government should they fail to assist them to retrieve their money. Some suspect that the Government is in bed with the Menzgold CEO, Nana Appiah Mensah reason for which no action has been taken by government.
Finance Minister Ken Ofori-Atta and Chairman of the Finance Committee of Parliament have categorically stated that government will not intervene in the matter and that customers should consider their investments lost a position that has been challenged by the Minority in Parliament.
Updates from the Bank of Ghana indicate that majority of the banks have met the minimum capital requirement of GHC400 million with the fate of the remaining banks to be decided after December 31 2018 deadline.
The Bank of Ghana consolidated 5 banks and gave approval for GCB to take over two banks over the last year, yet punitive measures are yet to be meted out to the liable persons. This has caused many to question the seriousness of the intended reforms in the sector.
The second segment of the programme will see CDD's Executive Director, Prof. H Kwasi Prempeh and former CHRAJ Commissioner Emile Short join Bright Simons and Kojo Bentil to discuss efforts on the war on corruption and the RTI Bill.Watch a live stream of the show here"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"71"	2018-12-25	"The Speaker of Parliament, Professor Aaron Mike Ocquaye has asked civil society organisations to leave the legislature alone to do its work as far as the Right to Information (RTI) Bill is concerned.
Promising the RTI bill would be passed by February 2019, Prof Mike Oquaye said: “The bill has seen several years and several parliaments, and it is tricky in many ways.
“The budget and other important matters also came our way.
“We have done 80 per cent of the bill already, and we will finish the bill fully, I believe and professionally, on or before the end of February 2019,” he said.
“The public should please trust us and leave us alone for now to do a good job. We are committed to passing the bill and we are working towards it. No civil society should, at this belated hour, jump on our backs and pretend as if they are the people who are interested in passing this bill,” Prof. Oquaye added.
CSOs have been putting pressure on parliament to pass the bill which has spent almost two decades before the legislature.
Recently, there was a spat between the Media Coalition on the RTI and some security officers in parliament when the group’s members wore red t-shirts to the premises of the law-making body to pile pressure on the house to pass the bill."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"72"	2005-12-20	" "	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"73"	2018-12-23	"The Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Aaron Mike Ocquaye, has asked civil society groups to “leave” parliament alone to finish work on the Right to Information Bill.
According to Prof. Ocquaye, Parliament has completed 80% of work on the bill and will pass it by February 2019.
“While parliament is working hard to pass the Right of Information bill, certain persons and institutions are acting as if we are drooling off on the bill. this is fallacious and I will be glad if the media will seriously correct this impression. The bill has seen several years and several parliaments, and it is tricky in many ways. The budget and other important matters came on the way. We have done 80%  of the work already, we will finish the bill fully, I believe, and professionally on or before the end of February 2019.
“The public should please trust us and leave us alone for now to do a good job. We are committed to passing the bill and we are working towards it. No civil society group should, at this belated hour, jump on our backs and pretend as if they are the people interested in the passage of this bill,” Prof. Ocquaye noted in his closing remarks of the 3rd meeting of the 7th Parliament Saturday night.
The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by Ghana’s 1992 Constitution and ratified as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The RTI bill was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament.
The bill was presented to Parliament on February 5, 2010 but has since not been passed despite undergoing countless number of amendments. The delay in the passage of the bill has attracted many groups in recent times including the Media coalition on RTI to exert torrid pressure on Parliament to pass the bill before it rises."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"74"	2018-12-23	"The Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Aaron Mike Ocquaye, has asked civil society groups to “leave” parliament alone to finish work on the Right to Information Bill.
According to Prof. Ocquaye, Parliament has completed 80% of work on the bill and will pass it by February 2019.
“While parliament is working hard to pass the Right of Information bill, certain persons and institutions are acting as if we are drooling off on the bill. this is fallacious and I will be glad if the media will seriously correct this impression. The bill has seen several years and several parliaments, and it is tricky in many ways. The budget and other important matters came on the way. We have done 80%  of the work already, we will finish the bill fully, I believe, and professionally on or before the end of February 2019.
“The public should please trust us and leave us alone for now to do a good job. We are committed to passing the bill and we are working towards it. No civil society group should, at this belated hour, jump on our backs and pretend as if they are the people interested in the passage of this bill,” Prof. Ocquaye noted in his closing remarks of the 3rd meeting of the 7th Parliament Saturday night.
The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by Ghana’s 1992 Constitution and ratified as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The RTI bill was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament.
The bill was presented to Parliament on February 5, 2010 but has since not been passed despite undergoing countless number of amendments. The delay in the passage of the bill has attracted many groups in recent times including the Media coalition on RTI to exert torrid pressure on Parliament to pass the bill before it rises."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"75"	2018-12-23	" The Speaker of Parliament, Prof. Aaron Mike Ocquaye, says parliament needs space to finish off work on the “tricky” Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
 According to him, work on the bill is near completion and will come off by February 2019.
 Prof. Ocquaye in his closing remarks of the 3rd meeting of the 7th Parliament Saturday night said: “While parliament is working hard to pass the Right of Information bill, certain persons and institutions are acting as if we are drooling off on the bill. This is fallacious and I will be glad if the media will seriously correct this impression. The bill has seen several years and several parliaments, and it is tricky in many ways. The budget and other important matters came on the way. We have done 80% of the work already, we will finish the bill fully, I believe, and professionally on or before the end of February 2019.
 He added: “The public should please trust us and leave us alone for now to do a good job. We are committed to passing the bill and we are working towards it. No civil society group should, at this belated hour, jump on our backs and pretend as if they are the people interested in the passage of this bill. ”About the RTI Bill
 The Right to Information Bill is meant to ensure citizens of this country have access to official information from Public Offices on request and without request.
 The RTI is implicit in the notion that the Ghanaian taxpayers need to have access to the Information concerning what Government does with their money and what government plans to do on their behalf.
 The Bill is meant to put in effect Article 21(1) (f) of the 1992 constitution of the Republic of Ghana which states that “All persons shall have the right to Information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.
 The bill was first drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003. It also spells out the establishment of the right to information commission to ensure independence of the review process."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"76"	2018-12-23	"The Speaker of Parliament Rt Honourable Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye, has given a strong assurance that parliament will pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI) by February 2019.
According to him, while Parliament is committed to passing the RTI bill, there are some individuals creating the impression that the house has shown no commitment in passing the bill.
He said, while Parliament is working hard to pass the bill, they are some people who are acting as if the house is droning off the bill. This is fallacious and I want the media to correct this mis-impression.
The Speaker said the house has done 80% of the bill and will surely pass it on or by end of February 2019.
He called on individuals and civil society groups to desist from mounting pressure on the House to pass the bill.
He said, ” the public should please trust us and leave us alone for now to do a good job. We are committed to passing the bill and we are working towards it. No civil society organization should jump in our backs at this belated hour and behave as if they are the one ones interested in passing the bill.”"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"77"	2018-12-21	"Information Minister Kojo Oppong Nkrumah has appealed to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) to support government’s efforts to promote Press Freedom.
Mr. Nkrumah said the Akufo-Addo administration is keen on promoting a robust culture of Press Freedom. 
“We will continue to work towards the strengthening of the space for free expression” he added. 
The Minister was speaking at a meeting with the newly appointed head of UNESCO office in Ghana, Mr. Abdourahamane Diallo in Accra.
Mr. Diallo’s visit to the Information Minister and his deputies was to formally introduce himself after he took Office in November this year.
Mr. Nkrumah praised the contributions of UNESCO in promoting an independent and pluralistic press while thanking the organisation for sponsoring the 2018 World Press Freedom celebrations which was hosted in Ghana in May.
He said government was committed to passing the Right to Information Bill which for now only requires a procedure act.
“Parliament has gone past clause 50 of the RTI bill and is almost near the conclusion of consideration. However the budget season has delayed the passage of the RTI. Some say the right already exist but only requires a passing procedure act. We are very committed to passing it when Parliament resume next year” he told the UNESCO boss.
In a short remark, newly appointed country head of UNESCO office, Mr. Abdourahamane Diallo praised the excellent relations that exit between Ghana and UNESCO and assured its reinforcement. 
He congratulated the Information Minister for his leadership role and pledged to work together with the Ministry of Information. 
Until his appointment Mr. Diallo also worked as head of the UNESCO office in Kinshasa and UNESCO representative to the Democratic Republic of Congo."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"78"	2018-12-20	"Elvis Darko, a member of the Interim Steering Committee of the Media Coalition on the Right to Information Bill (RTI), has emphasized on the importance of having the RTI bill passed.
According to him, the RTI law will enable citizens, civil societies and even state agencies to access information even among themselves.
“We were in this country when we went for Americans to come and help us investigate the cause of fire in our markets, when the report was done and the Americans left, media went to the state agency for the report and they were told the report was a state secret, how can a report on the cause of fire in our markets be a state secret” he quizzed.
He said, the hoarding of such an information from the media does not only affect the substance of news put out by the media but also people who work in the market.
“ If such a report is said to be a state secret to the media then how can the market woman know whether the fire was caused by certain behaviors of theirs so they change  “ he said
According to him, the RTI law will give provision on how to access information from state agencies, the duration an information will get to you after you have requested and the actions one can take when an information is denied.
“So the RTI law is not only about attacking politicians and corruption but social service delivery, it goes beyond fighting corruption” he added.
Elvis was addressing the media on Thursday on the Right to Information BillABOUT THE RTI BILL
The Right to Information Bill is meant to ensure citizens of this country have access to official information from Public Offices on request and without request. 
The RTI is implicit in the notion that the Ghanaian taxpayers need to have access to the Information concerning what Government does with their money and what government plans to do on their behalf.
The Bill is meant to put in effect Article 21(1) (f) of the 1992 constitution of the Republic of Ghana which states that “All persons shall have the right to Information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society. 
The bill was first drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003. It also spells out the establishment of the right to information commission to ensure independence of the review process."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"79"	2018-12-20	"You cannot talk about democratic governance without the right to information (RTI) Kojo Asante, Director of Advocacy and Policy Engagement at the Center for Democratic Development has said.  
According to him, RTI is the core of how any democratic accountability processes is supposed to work. 
“You elect people to go and work for you, you assign them to do things that you as a private citizen are not able to do, how are you going to know that they are doing the things they are supposed to do, that the resources you’ve entrusted to them they are using it well” he quizzed.
Mr. Asante stressed, it is when you have a system of getting information that allows you to access that the work is been done well.  
“In other places people can sit in their office to access an official statement” adding that “It is perverse to have a democracy where you don’t have a system where citizens can access information so they can hold their duty bearers accountable”,  
He said, even with the medical drones and its accompanying controversy, how is the media going to get access to information to understand the contract and explain it to the citizenry. 
“Is it going to be that, you need to have somebody in a higher office to sneak out information or the media can easily access information” he quizzed Kojo Asante was addressing the media on Thursday, on the Right to Information Bill   
/b>About the RTI Bill  
The Right to Information Bill is meant to ensure citizens of this country have access to official information from Public Offices on request and without request.   
The RTI is implicit in the notion that the Ghanaian taxpayers need to have access to the Information concerning what Government does with their money and what government plans to do on their behalf.  
The Bill is meant to put in effect Article 21(1) (f) of the 1992 constitution of the Republic of Ghana which states that “All persons shall have the right to Information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.   
The bill was first drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003. It also spells out the establishment of the right to information commission to ensure independence of the review process."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"80"	2018-12-18	"Local chapter of Transparency International, Ghana Integrity Initiative has charged Government and its responsible agencies to as a matter of urgency provide an update on all corruption cases that have previously been investigated but have not been concluded.
This they believe is necessary for the fight against corruption and to keep the public informed on these cases since it is their right to be given such information.
Ghana Integrity Initiative advances that unlike times in the past when corruption allegations emerge and 'die a natural death' despite reports that investigations have been conducted on them, the current cases of corruption being investigated should not be made to die off.
Addressing a media interaction at the Ghana International Press Center in Accra, Programmes Manager of the Ghana Integrity Initiative, Mary Awelana Addah highlighted alleged corruption instances that have been brought to the attention of relevant agencies for investigations to be conducted.
Key among the many corruption cases that were outlined included the Anas Aremeyaw Anas expose of the Ghana Football Association that resulted in the resignation of former FA President Kwesi Nyantekyi; Manasseh Azure's investigative piece on Joseph Siaw Agyapong's Jospong Group $74 million dollar waste bin scandal and $98 million fumigation contract awarded 11 companies of Jospong by Local Government Ministry; Metro Mass transit brouhaha where the state reportedly lost $1m as a result of undervaluation of 200 buses; Double salary allegations against MP-Ministers of erstwhile Mahama administration; Ghana bauxite company scandal $90m loss to the state due to unrecorded overloaded trucks; The Australian Visa scandal, 230 premix fuel diversions cited in 2017.
The motive she said is to remind the government of the need to tackle corruption ruthlessly and ensure that offenders have been brought to book.
To this end, Ghana Integrity Initiative is calling on Government to make public evidence gathered from these investigations and make known actions to be taken against persons involved.
The GII Programmes Manager detailed \"truth be told, it does not portend well the for the image of this country when the outcomes of widely reported corruption cases are never known by the public. These have implications on our image and they also have implications on the various surveys that are churned out on an annual basis particularly on the CPI (Corruption Perception Index). 
GII is of the view that it is the right of Ghanaians to know and therefore, demands an update from the Attorney General and Ministers and Ministries which have oversight responsibilities over the institutions where these alleged acts of corruption took place.\" Posture of public institutions in responding to anti-corruption matters not encouraging
The GII Executive Director suggested that the response of state institutions to enquiries by citizens for information isn't the best.
She said the posture doesn't encourage the fight against corruption in any way as it is not welcoming and warm.
Linda Ofori-Kwafo explained that public institutions are a repository of information for the people and are obliged by the constitution to make sure that information is available when needed.
She bemoaned the absence of a Right to Information Law which she hinted will make access to information convenient.
GII Executive Director continued \"you are all in this country and you are aware, there is no RTI Bill anywhere which will make it compulsory for state institutions to give us information. Even without information, you know Article 21 of the constitution makes it clear that we are supposed and we deserve to know and have the right to information from public institutions because they keep it for us. At any point in time, we are supposed to have updates on these matters. Media people have followed these matters, we ourselves have actually asked questions several times. Sometimes you write to these institutions to ask for one question and before you get a response a number of questions have been answered for you - meaning, do not come back to us. The posture of public institutions in providing responses to anti-corruption matters sometimes is not really really encouraging.\"We are not always satisfied with investigations
Executive Director of the Ghana Integrity Initiative, Linda Ofori-Kwafo has disclosed the displeasure of her outfit at some of the investigations carried out into corruption allegations in the country.
Linda Ofori-Kwafo suggested that Ghana Integrity Initiative isn't always satisfied with the reports detailing the investigations into alleged corruption activities of high profiled personalities and people in authority within the Ghanaian setting.
\"Sometimes when corruption allegations come up and it involves the big people like parliamentarians and the rest, sometimes the report that comes out, we are not so satisfied but who are you? They say that they have already conducted investigations, completed and it's over\" GII Executive Director told the gathering."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"81"	2018-12-18	"The Majority Leader in Parliament, who also doubles as the Minister For Parliamentary Affairs, Osei Kyei-Mensah Bonsu has expressed optimism about the quick passage of the Right to Information bill, saying greater works on fine-tuning the bill has been done.
Speaking at a media encounter which featured members of the Parliamentary Press Corps, the Minister allayed concerns of further delay.
The Majority Leader, who also represents the people of Suame constituency in the Ashanti region, noted that with the amendments that are left to be done, he is hopeful of the passage of the RTI bill within three to four days of its deliberation.
The Right To Information Bill, which has been in and out of Parliament for over two decades, has in recent times received more attention with various coalitions spearheading its passage under this current seventh Parliament.
According to Mr Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu, Parliament is required to do a good job on the bill, which to him is the reason the House is scrutinizing the clauses by making the various amendments.
In a related development, he hinted of a possible review of the Standing Orders of Parliament, which will allow for media coverage of committee sittings to give the public more insight into other committees as it is with the Public Accounts Committee.
The media dialogue was under the Theme: ”Interrogating Parliament's Contributions To The Consolidation Of Ghana’s Democracy Thus Far: The Perspective of The Media”. It also brought together some senior journalists who made some contributions on the evening.
The Majority Leader was also of the view that journalists should specialize in an area of reporting, in order to offer the grounds for such journalists to become an authority in that particular area.
For example, he advised journalists to take it upon themselves to dwell on health by following the workings of the Health Committee in Parliament, in order to have access to as much information and knowledge.
The Minority Leader, Mr Haruna Iddrisu, who made an intervention, was of the view that journalists, have not given balanced reports of the proceedings in the House and therefore called on the Parliamentary Press Corps in particular to take a look at it.
He was not pleased with what he said was a misrepresentation of contributions of Members of Parliament on the floor.
According to him, headlines do not represent the content of stories and called on journalists to check it as well.
For him, it will do the nation lots of good, if the media make deliberate efforts to be interested in the approval, disbursement and expenditure of the petroleum fund."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"82"	2018-12-17	" The plans by parliament to pass the Right To Information (RTI) bill is likely to hit the rock, as the Alliance for Development and Industrialization has asked the government to suspend with immediate effect, the debate on the RTI.
 According to the ADI, until structures such as validation or verification of content are put in place or established, the government should not be in haste in passing the bill.
 “First and foremost the government needs to establish a secretariat for the RTI where all Ministries Department and Agencies (MDAs) would be hooked onto one particular platform for the supply of authentic news bulletin”.
 Also, the Secretariat should establish a conduit where all information request from an individual or corporate organization could be channelled through. The Secretariat should demand an ID from people who are requesting for the information.
 This, the ADI said would be a reliable source of news information for the general public.
 Additionally, the ADI is asking the National Media Commission, (NMC), the statutory regulator of the media industry, to be proactive in devising methods of content approval with support from the Ministry of Communications, Ministry of Information and the National Commission for Civic Education to create an electronic content and monitoring approval centre to aid in authentic news dissemination.
 The platform should have a content validation code which can be used by everyone in verifying news item via SMS.
 This is expected to generate about 4000 jobs for media practitioners.
 The call by the ADI comes at the back of fake news which normally goes viral on social media with an instantaneous response from readers. “Many individuals make use of photoshops to communicate, which in many a time turns out to be fake. If this menace is not curtailed it may even lead to a coup d’état. We need to police the social media”, it said.
 “If our demand is not adhered to, we plan to go on countless demonstration across the country, until our call to put the passage of the RTI on hold is heeded to”, ADI threatens.
 They have also cautioned that no government should be in haste to pass the RTI bill because of political promise which may erode the democracy that the country has enjoyed since 1992 to date.
 ADI fears that if proper structures are not put in place, taking into account the modern social media, any fake news that is published may lead to the collapse of a particular government as it has happened in other countries like Egypt and Tunisia.
 The ADI has asked the government to support and use the NMC as a conduit for content verification and validation. This is expected to cut down on fake news and unverified content.
 The ADI has also tasked the NMC to create a platform where the general public could be alerted on fake news which may go viral on social media.
 Parliament has begun the consideration of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill which has been before the House since 2013.
 The bill which was ushered into its consideration stage is expected to be discussed clause by clause with all concerns debated and voted upon. The rationale for the bill is to give right and access to official information held by public institutions, private entities which perform public functions with public funds.
 The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights. The bill will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society”.
 The bill was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"83"	2018-12-15	" I need to rant.
 I just got to read a copy of the Service Agreement between MOH and Zipline, minus the schedules and all-important Schedule 2. I will nitpick some more later.
 But I’m miffed. This is just an agreement to provide another means of transporting emergency, ‘dronable’ medical supplies to all health facilities around the country. It could even be to a hospital.
 So why was the Agreement not put out to the public right from get-go.
 I believe that the government deserves EVERY criticism, especially the unfair, that it has been receiving. Why? We still have a culture that assumes that the Ghanaian is so idiotic that we can’t process information. Somehow we ought to be protected from information because it’s dangerous to our health. So by default, they give us what they think our puny brains can process.
 That disrespects us. Then we are left to speaking and arguing, uninformed. Ghana paid, at least in part, for us to go to school all the way to uni. What we have in our heads was paid for by Ghana. We owe it to Ghana to apply that in analyzing matters that come up. When you deny us of information, you deny us of the basic oxygen that we need to contribute meaningfully to such issues. And you aren’t smarter than us simply because you are in a position of authority.
 Why didn’t you simply put out the Agreement to the public as soon as you laid it? Don’t even try that “confidentiality clause” excuse. PDF it. Disseminate through social media. SimpleS. We will read. We will talk.
 Government, you may be wrong on this deal. If you are, we need to tell you so that whatever deal you are planning to do may be aborted early and quickly, with the least pain. But you may be right. If you are, the debate and analysis will only make you and the deal stronger.
 You see, the near-comical reluctance to pass the RTI Bill is a reflection of this sick attitude; and the ultimate loser is the government.
 PS. Respect my right to typos."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"84"	2018-12-13	" Chairman for the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee of Parliament Ben Abdallah says the approval of the 2019 budget is of more importance than the RTI Bill.
 That, according to him, was the reason why the House deferred the consideration of the RTI bill for the 2019 budget presented to Parliament last month by the Finance Minister Ken Ofori Atta.
 “You must bear with us with respect to the workings of parliament because now we are considering the budget and on the scale of preference the budget is more important than the RTI now,” he told Starr News’ Parliamentary Correspondent Ibrahim Alhassan Wednesday in Accra.
 “If we don’t approve the budget how do we run the country?” he quizzed saying:  “Even the RTI, when it becomes a law it will be funded by the budget. So, as it is at the moment the budget is of more paramount importance than the RTI.”Need for caution
 That notwithstanding, he said the passage of the RTI bill which was laid before Parliament in March this year “was long overdue.”
 However, he warned against attempt to stampede Parliament into passing the Bill observing that Consideration of bills such as the RTI needs a lot of time to avoid mistakes.
 “That’s where you can make and unmake the laws. So, if you don’t take your time because pressure seem to be coming from all corners of the society, and you decide to rush the bill into a law, you may end up making a lot of mistakes which cannot be corrected until the whole law is holistically reviewed or amended,” he said.
 As it stands now, the RTI bill is likely to be passed next year and according to the Majority Leader Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu  the first two weeks of Parliament’s  meeting would be set aside  to pass the Right to Information Bill into Law should it fail to do so before it rises on Saturday 22 December.
 Speaking at a dialogue between the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and Civil Society, he said the House will try its best within the constraints of considering appropriations to pass the bill before it rises.
 But if that fails, the House will dedicate the first two weeks of the next meeting which begins in January to work on finalizing the bill, the Majority leader who’s also the Parliamentary Affairs Minister added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"85"	2018-12-13	"Former President John Kufuor has waded into the controversies surrounding the delay in the passage of the Right to Information Bill saying clauses of the bill must be pruned so it does not hurt national security.
“The real challenge is not government refusing to pass the bill. But the text of the Bill has not been revisited enough to offer guarantees to information that are of security and stability concerns to the integrity of the nation itself.
“This Bill must be passed to achieve better governance, Yes. But it must not be at the cost of security and stability of the nation,” Mr. Kufuor noted at an invent at the University of Professional Studies in Accra Wednesday.
The chairman of the constitutional, legal and Parliamentary affairs committee of parliament has also warned against stampeding parliament to pass the bill.
“That’s where you can make and unmake the laws. So, if you don’t take your time because pressure seems to be coming from all corners of the society, and you decide to rush the bill into a law, you may end up making a lot of mistakes which cannot be corrected until the whole law is holistically reviewed or amended,” he said.
As it stands now, the RTI bill is likely to be passed next year and according to the Majority Leader Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu, the first two weeks of Parliament’s  meeting would be set aside to pass the Right to Information Bill into Law should it fail to do so before it rises on Saturday 22 December.
Speaking at a dialogue between the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and Civil Society, he said the House will try its best within the constraints of considering appropriations to pass the bill before it rises.
But if that fails, the House will dedicate the first two weeks of the next meeting which begins in January to work on finalizing the bill, the Majority leader who’s also the Parliamentary Affairs Minister added.
Delays in the passage of the bill have been frustrating to journalists and the coalition pushing for its passage."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"86"	2018-12-13	" Daily Graphic:
 * EOCO retrieves GH¢51m in taxes from private companies, institutions, individuals
 * Inflation now 9.3%
 * Ghana poised for significant transformation - @NAkufoAddo
 Ghanaian Times:
 * EOCO retrieves GH¢51m from tax evaders
 * Support growth, dev't of the African continent - @MBawumia urges people of African descent
 * Ghana is preferred investment destination - @NAkufoAddo
 * House resumes work on RTI Bill
 B&FT:
 * Govt eyes aviation gateway as Ghana signs deals with Canada et al
 * BoG could cut interest rates by March - Dr Addison
 * State Enterprises Commission to become Authority
 * Use electronic payments to beat traffic this Yuletide - GhIPSS
 Daily Statesman:
 * NPP 'kills' NDC propaganda - We've done more in two years than your eight - Nana B
 * @NAkufoAddo sells Ghana to Japanese investors
 * Drones mean so much more than politics
 * @MBawumia: Africa, diaspora must collaborate more"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"87"	2018-12-13	"Former NDC Central Regional Chairman, Allotey Jacobs has cast doubts over the enactment of the Right to Information Bill by Parliament.
According to Allotey Jacobs, it is near impossibility for the legislators to pass the bill since it will entrap them.
There have been lots of discussions and agitations for the Right to Information Bill to be enacted into an Act by the Legislative House.
Speaker of Parliament, Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye recently directed the Joint Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Communication to expedite action on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
Addressing legislators, Prof. Oquaye told the joint committee to ensure it completed work on the RTI Bill expeditiously and “make a report as quickly as possible in order for us to deliberate thereof”.
But some Members of Parliament are opposing the passage of the bill into law.
K.T. Hammond, Member of Parliament for Adansi Asokwa is reported to have said “there will be no secret in government” should the bill be passed.
“You need peace of mind to run a government. You need to concentrate and if you have a bill and before the ink dries on it, somebody is asking you to ‘bring this document’ . . . to the extent that we are talking about communication between the president, the vice president and cabinet, potentially there will be no secret in government . . . ‘Free society’ and all that is a journalist’s jargon and until they sit on the seat of an administrator, they will not know what it feels like to be pestered for information.
“Gold nuggets are in there for journalists. One single slip, ministers cannot operate, government cannot proceed effectively, governance cannot take place meaningfully with this sort of albatross hanging over our heads,” he said.
Speaking to sit-in host Nana Yaw Kesseh on Peace FM’s ‘Kokrokoo’, the NDC stalwart believes the bill will serve as a trap and expose the secrets of politicians, hence asking “who will want his secret to be exposed?”
To him, the bill won’t be approved by Parliament.
“You can’t set a trap for yourself. Politicians won’t approve this RTI. It’s not going to be possible,” he said."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"88"	2018-12-12	"The Media Foundation of West Africa (MFWA) has stated that the conduct of the New Patriotic Party (NPP) government in relation to the Right to Information (RTI) Bill is extremely disappointing and deeply embarrassing.
According to the Foundation, since the NPP assumed office on January 7, 2017, senior figures within the current government have given a number of assurances that the Bill will be passed, all of which have gone unfulfilled.
These include ministers of state, the Speaker of Parliament, the Vice President and even the President.
“We remain mystified and deeply embarrassed by the cycle of unfulfilled promises from the three most powerful people of our land and ministers of state.
“MFWA finds the government’s foot-dragging on the RTI bill very disappointing and deeply embarrassing,” the MFWA said.Below is the rest of their statement
In its 2016 manifesto, the governing NPP assured that it would ensure the passage of the RTI Bill if the then Parliament failed to do so.
Therefore, when the party won the 2016 elections, many expected that the Bill would be passed within a short period into the administration.
The expectations of Ghanaians was thus heightened when a month into the administration, the  Vice President, Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, promised that the Bill would be passed within 100 days.
However, the 100 days elapsed without any definitive action on the Bill.
On the occasion of World Press Freedom Day (WPFD) on May 3, 2017, it was the turn of the then Minister of Information, Dr. Mustapha Abdul-Hamid, to promise and give a timeline.
“In the May-to-July Session of parliament, the Right to Information Bill shall be before them for debate and for passage. That is a given; it is non-negotiable,” the Information Minister said emphatically.
Just when the Information Minister’s deadline was approaching, the President himself came in with a respite.
Delivering the Keynote Address at the Open Data Conference in Accra on July 20, 2017, President Nana Akufo-Addo made a fresh promise that raised the hope of many Ghanaians that even if the Information Minister’s deadline was not met, once the President himself had spoken, the Bill would see the light of day sooner than later.
“It is our intention also to ensure the long-overdue passage of the Right to Information bill by Parliament,” His Excellency the President assured the nation.
But not even a Presidential promise and assurance was enough to have the RTI Bill passed within the first year of the NPP government.
It turned out to be just promises and nothing else.
Enter 2018, and the promises would even get worse and quite embarrassing.
The year started with a number of promises from junior government officials whose promises could pass without notice given the trend and the record of 2017.
The President of Ghana gave another assurance at the 2018 Independence Day Celebration.
But when the President came in with another assurance during his Independence Day speech on March 6, 2018, it could not be ignored as just another promise.
In his speech, the President was loud and clear.
He said: “There is, however, one piece of the anti-corruption framework that is yet to be put in place; the Right to Information bill.
After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring the bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before the end of the current meeting of Parliament.”
That meeting of Parliament was to end on March 23.
The closeness of the date could make one skeptical about the promise but given who had made the promise one could not but be hopeful.
As if the President’s assurance was not firm enough, the Vice, Dr.Mahamudu Bawumia, repeated the promise barely two weeks later.
This time he alluded to a cabinet action on the Bill.
“Just a couple of weeks ago, Cabinet has given approval to the Right to Information (RTI) Bill to be laid in parliament for debate and approval because it is very critical that we pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill,” the Vice President announced to Ghanaian and foreign audience at the  Norway-Ghana Business Forum in Accra on March 19.
The Presidential and Vice Presidential promises went by unfulfilled.
Again one wondered what could have prompted the two most powerful persons of the land to make firm promises on an important piece of legislation without a fulfillment.
At this stage one could not but lose hope and feel embarrassed.
The gamut of promise-and-fails appeared not enough to discourage further promises.
The next promise was delivered before a worldwide audience which had gathered in Accra for the 2018 global celebration of World Press Freedom Day (WPFD).
The same Information Minister, who had made a non-negotiable promise of having the RTI bill passed in July 2017, was to give yet another promise.
“The Right to Information bill is going to become law before the close of this year,” the Information told the audience from over 100 countries.
The lip service was to continue but this time, not from the Executive but the legislature.
The Majority leader who is also the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Osei Kyei  Mensah Bonsu, took over the button.
Speaking at the National Delegates Congress of the NPP in July, 2018, the Parliamentary Affairs Minister reaffirmed the Information Minister’s promise.
At an engagement with selected journalists in Accra on November 12, 2018, the third most powerful person of the land, the Speaker of Parliament, Rt. Hon. Mike Aaron Quaye, took his turn to promise. He told the journalists:  “The Right to Information Bill will be a thing of the past by end of this year. I can assure you, it will be done.”
But with less than two weeks for parliament to rise, the Vice President who had promised that the Bill was to be passed within 100 days of the NPP government announces that the Bill will be passed in 2019.
We remain mystified and deeply embarrassed by the cycle of unfulfilled promises from the three most powerful people of our land and ministers of state.
Under the circumstance, one wonders whether the political leadership of Ghana truly care about the fundamental right of the citizenry, and is indeed committed to transparent and accountable governance.
In any case, MFWA finds the government’s foot-dragging on the RTI bill very disappointing and deeply embarrassing.
“We wish to commend the Coalition of civil society groups, the media and all well-meaning Ghanaians who have been involved in the struggle to get the RTI Bill passed. We urge such groups to remain as resolute as ever and keep the flame of the struggle aloft until the fundamental right of the Ghanaian people to access information is assured by an RTI Law.”"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"89"	2018-12-11	" Mr Joseph Osei Owusu, the First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, on Monday announced that Parliament has suspended all parts of the Standing Orders that required the formation of a quorum before discussing provisions in the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
 He said the move would ensure that the few members of Parliament, who were committed to the passage of the RTI Bill, would continue working on the Bill.
 He said the decision was taken in consultation with the Speaker of Parliament since some members of the House did not turn up during discussions on the Bill; therefore it failed to form a quorum.
 “Sometimes it is frustrating when the impression is created that Parliament is not willing to pass the Right to Information Law, and must emphasise that ever since I have been an MP, for the first time the rare powers of Parliament was used so that we could work on the Right to Information by suspending the Standing Orders with respect to quorum, ”Mr Osei Owusu added.
 The First Deputy Speaker of the House said this at the closing ceremony of the Anti-Corruption Conference in Accra on Monday.
 Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia was the special guest of honour for the conference, which also marked the celebration of the 70th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 15th anniversary of the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
 Mr Osei Owusu, who chaired the function, observed that sometimes after intensive public campaign towards the passage of a particular legislation of interest, a few years after the enactment of the law, the public abandon it and nobody showed interest in its utilisation.
 He cited the Local Governance Act, section 47, which required every resident of a district to ask for information from any of the district assemblies regarding the amount generated from internally-generated funds and how it was utilised, and the Secretary to the Assembly was obliged to provide that information.
 The Legislator was not happy that most people were not exploring that law, which was passed two years ago, and underscored the need to decentralize the law and encourage people to take advantage of the existing legislations.
 This is the strongest determination shown by Parliament to pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI) into law since the Bill was first placed on the floor of the House almost 20 years ago.
 The passage of the RTI law would clearly defined information that could be released to the public by the various government agencies and those that are classified.
 Mr Osei Owusu also expressed misgivings about indiscipline in the society that is retarding the country’s progress, noting that, every little space in urban centres had been occupied by people with the erection of unauthorized kiosks.
 He said there was the need to educate children at Kindergarten with new values to grow up thinking differently.
 “Our generation has been bad, we’re the ones destroying this meat, we have depleted the place with kiosks and overlooked all the building plans and we’re the ones being the highest in taking bribes and subverting the laws of this country.
 “So we should be investing in changing the next generation so that we will return to the values we use to respect,”he added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"90"	2018-12-11	"Civil society groups pushing for the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill, have called on parliament to immediately resume consideration of the Bill as members of the leadership of the house provide conflicting assurances about the passage of the bill into law.
The Media Coalition on RTI, OccupyGhana, and the Coalition on RTI, view the conflicting assurances as another sign of the lukewarm attitude demonstrated by the House towards the bill so far, a joint statement said.
While the Speaker, the Majority Leader and the Minority were emphatic that the bill will be passed into law before the end of this year, the First Deputy Speaker has indicated that the bill will be passed early next year.
On Monday, Vice-President Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia shocked civil society organisations (CSOs) when he categorically stated that the bill will rather be passed at the parliamentary sitting next year.RTI Bill to be passed next year – Dr Bawumia
Addressing a ceremony to commemorate International Anti-Corruption and Human Rights Day under the auspices of the Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), Dr Bawumia revealed that discussions he has had with the First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Joe Osei Owusu, confirm that about half of the proposed amendments to the bill have so far been considered by Parliament, and, hopefully, at its next sitting, the bill should get passed after being before the house since 2013.
“Parliament has also begun consideration to the Right to Information Bill, which has been before the house since 2013; the rationale for the bill is to give the right and access to official information being held by public institutions, private entities which perform public functions with public funds,” the Vice-President observed.
He added that “government has taken notice of the persistent effort by several advocacy groups to have the Right to Information (RTI) Bill passed”.
He said government is committed to having the RTI law to boost the fight against corruption.
“I just asked the Rt. Honourable 1st Deputy Speaker where we are because we keep asking for updates and he tells me they have considered about half of the amendments to the bill so far, so it looks like all things being equal, early in the next session of Parliament; he tells me this bill that has been sought after for the last 20 years, by the Grace of God and with your effort, we should see it passed,” he added.Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu hints bill may enter 2019
The revelation ties in with what the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, who also doubles as Majority Leader, hinted that if the bill was not passed before the end of this session, Parliament would definitely do so in the first two weeks of the next session.
The positions of First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Joe Osei Owusu, and Majority Leader Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu contradict the firm assurances given by Speaker of Parliament Professor Aaron Mike Ocquaye and Minority Leader Haruna Iddrisu that the bill will be passed into law before the end of 2018.
Speaker says the Bill will be passed before end of 2018
On Monday, November 12, 2018, Speaker of Parliament Professor Aaron Mike Ocquaye gave the strongest indication that parliament would pass the RTI Bill into an Act by close of 2018.
Minority Leader says bill will be passed before end of 2018
Similarly, on November 30, 2018, Minority Leader Haruna Iddrisu also assured that the RTI Bill will be passed before 2018 comes to a close.Parliament rises Friday, December 21
Parliament is expected to rise on Friday, December 21, 2018 for the Christmas break.8 Sitting days left for Parliament to go on break
The CSOs observed that Parliament has only eight sitting days left to rise for the Christmas break.RTI Bill never considered after budget presentation
According to the statement, ever since the Finance Minister presented the 2019 budget statement to the House on November 15, 2018, the RTI Bill has never come up for consideration.
“This means that after the budget, Parliament sat for 11 days without considering the RTI Bill,” it added.Parliament sat for 27 days already
Between October 30 when the House resumed sitting and December 6, 2018, parliament has sat for 27 days.
The CSOs noted that out of this, the House considered the RTI Bill for just about 10 days, and on two separate occasions, the consideration ended abruptly because they could not form quorum.Lack of quorum
Quorum means 92 Members of Parliament, which constitutes one-third of the 275 Members, are needed to consider a bill.
The statement observed that Parliament has relegated the RTI Bill to the background after the budget presentation and has focused on other issues.38 Clauses considered so far
Parliament resumed work on the RTI Bill from clause seven and has done up to clause 38.
Out of this, a number of clauses have also been deferred for further consideration, and nothing has been heard about the deferred clauses till date.
“It is the candid view of the coalition that any attempt to delay the passage of the bill before the end of this year will be unfortunate and Parliament would be seen as treating the concerns of Ghanaians with contempt,” it stated.
The RTI Bill has passed through the first and second readings and is at the consideration stage, with 138 amendments, mostly substitution or deletion of words, proposed to be considered by the House.Background
The object of the RTI Bill is to provide for the operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society.
It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and to provide for related matters.
The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010. It was brought back to the Sixth Parliament but could not be passed till the expiration of that Parliament on January 6, 2016.
After months of waiting, the bill was laid in Parliament early this year (2018) by the Deputy Attorney-General and Minister of Justice, Joseph Dindiok."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"91"	2018-12-11	"Daily Graphic:
* Danger! Earthquake looms in Accra - Geological Survey warns
* National Policy Summit opens in Takoradi
* 1 killed, 3 injured in Bole chieftaincy dispute
* adb, NIB merger cancelled 
Daily Guide:
* NDC didn't pay my ex-gratia - Kufuor
* New regions report out 
* 4 British girls sexually assaulted at Kokrobite 
* Akufo-Addo commissions $40m Sunda diaper factory
Ghanaian Times:
* We'll pass RTI Bill in 2019 - @MBawumia 
* Aggrieved customers of Gold Coast Fund Management besiege company to demand deposits
* Govt imposes curfew on Bole 
Today:
* GIIF denies signing deal with Jospong 
* Two killed in Bole Chieftaincy clashes 
* PPP wades into RTI Bill
Chronicle:
* I've not been paid ex-gratia but I'm not worried - Kufuor
* No vehicles for Ada Police as armed robbers strike
Daily Statesman:
* Reinvest Free SHS savings - Prof Yankah urges parents to plan for higher education
* Less 'face-to-face' aids fight against corruption - @MBawumia
* Bole chieftaincy clashes leave two dead"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"92"	2018-12-10	"The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Africa Office, has called on Ghanaians to demand accountability from public officers for the realization of their human rights.
CHRI specifically encourages Ghanaians to demand their human rights as guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).
Coincidentally, December 10 marks International Human Rights Day.
In commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) on December 10, 2018, CHRI uses the occasion to celebrate successes and recommit to the principles outlined in the Declaration’s 30 Articles.
In a statement, CHRI noted the strides that have been made so far in the 70 years, citing the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, who had summarized the gains and prospects of human rights movements as follows:
“Over the past 70 years the Declaration has inspired liberation movements and led to better access to justice, social protections, economic opportunities and political participation. Wherever respect for its commitments has been present, the dignity of millions has been uplifted, suffering prevented and the foundations laid for a more just world. We need to keep pushing forward”.
CHRI again established the relationship which exists between Human Rights and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and how Ghana and Africa at large can realise these goals.
It also noted that the government has a key role to play in the realization of Human Rights but observed “corruption leads to violation of the government’s human rights obligation”.Find the full statement below:
INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS DAY 2018 COMMEMORATING THE 70TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS (UDHR)
Today December 10th, is a day the world commemorates International Human Rights Day every year. This year also marks the climax of the year-long celebration of the 70th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).
The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, Africa Office joins Ghanaians and the International Community to commemorate the day and Stand up for human rights. As noted by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet in a message to commemorate the day, “over the past 70 years the Declaration has inspired liberation movements and led to better access to justice, social protections, economic opportunities and political participation. Wherever respect for its commitments has been present, the dignity of millions has been uplifted, suffering prevented and the foundations laid for a more just world.
We need to keep pushing forward” The human rights movement has made great strides in the past seven decades, but abuses still occur with saddening regularity. The anniversary of the Declaration is an opportunity to celebrate successes and recommit ourselves to the principles outlined in the Declaration’s 30 Articles. The UDHR, with its constant standards of equality, justice and human dignity, lays a solid foundation of a just world for all UN member states and their citizens.
The Declaration is a commitment, by all States, that they will protect and promote human rights. Without the respect for human rights, other equally important UN values such as development, peace and security cannot be attained.
Ghana just like many countries is “big” on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as a means of improving the lives of its citizens. Human rights are at the heart of the SDGs, since in the absence of human dignity we cannot drive sustainable development. “A human right is clean water and food (SDG 6, SDG 2), it is health (SDG 3) and the opportunity to lead a peaceful life (SDG 16); It is life on land (SDG 15) and walking the Earth among its many beings (SDG 13, SDG 14).
Human Rights are driven by progress on all SDGs, and the SDGs are driven by advancements on human rights.” We at the CHRI Africa Office have chosen to focus on Goal 16 and its targets as we commemorate this day, for these lie at the heart of our work.
The goal addresses issues of human security and access to justice; corruption, transparency and accountability; discrimination and exclusion of marginalised groups from political and governance processes as well as human rights and fundamental freedoms.
As Ghana joins the world to commemorate 70 years of the UDHR, CHRI Africa re-iterates calls it made to Government in 2017 i.e. “Human rights are indivisible and interdependent, and the consequences of corrupt governance are multiple and touch on all human rights — civil, political, economic, social and cultural, as well as the right to development.
Corruption leads to violation of the government’s human rights obligation “to take steps… to the maximum of its available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the full realization of the rights recognized in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights”. Corruption will also limit government from meeting the SDGs in general and Goal 16 specifically.
Therefore CHRI Africa once again urges Government to Stand up for Human Rights and take cognizance of the fact that some of the measures that can enhance transparency and accountability and contribute to sustainable anti-corruption measures and the fulfilment of the benefits of the UDHR and the SDGs are the adoption of laws that ensure the public’s access to information on governmental processes, decisions and policies-the Passage of a credible the RTI Bill into law- (which is fundamental to the realization of all other human rights), as well as institutional reforms which strengthen transparency and accountability.
We also call on all Ghanaians to Stand up for Human Rights by demanding accountability from public officers.
Wishing all Ghanaians a Happy and Fruitful Human Rights Day"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"93"	2018-12-10	"The Progressive People’s Party (PPP) has called on Parliament to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill before it goes on recess on December 22, 2018.
Expressing their displeasure as to why the RTI bill hasn’t been passed yet in parliament after several decades of it coming out as a law, the party said the unwillingness of the legislature to pass the bill has resulted in the rise of false information and the promotion of party propaganda above facts and truths. 
“Without access to information, our democracy cannot be meaningful. False information gives rise to wrong decisions and this only festers backwardness and the promotion of party propaganda above facts or truths,” the PPP noted in a statement signed by its National Secretary, Murtala Mohamed.
According to members of the PPP, as the world celebrates UN’s 70th anniversary of universal human rights, the Akufo-Addo-led administration and Parliament must as a matter of urgency take into consideration the rights of citizens in the country and pass the RTI Bill into law.
“We call on the current Parliament and the NPP administration which holds a commanding majority, to use its majority wisely and pass the right to information law before Parliament goes on recess this December 2018,” the statement further noted. 
They further commended the media for their efforts in the fight to pass the RTI Bill into law and called on government to protect journalists in the country as they have been victims of assaults in the hands of security personnel and politicians. 
“We also like to acknowledge the efforts our media has made in deepening our democracy, especially, their recent open fight for the passage of the right to information bill. It is however sad to know that some of them have been victims of violence in the course of performing their duty. It is even sad to note that the state has not been powerful enough to protect these journalists from powerful political parties and powerful interest groups.  We call for an end to all forms of violence against journalists and against free speech. Our rights and freedoms of expression are inalienable and cannot be qualified with any excuses or reasons,” the party added. 
However, Parliamentary Affairs Minister and Majority Leader, Osei Kyei-Mensah Bonsu has given the assurance that Parliament would pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill before the end of the session on Saturday, December 22.About RTI Bill
The RTI Bill is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The Bill, as it has been drafted, is to also give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that, “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.”
Successive governments have however failed to ensure its passage despite several assurances.
The RTI Media Coalition has emerged to push for the passage of the RTI Bill, and has been expressing concerns over frustrations from some legislators with their attempts to ensure the Bill is passed.
According to the Coalition, only 30 to 50 MPs are in the chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration.
They have cause for concern as the Adansi-Asokwa MP, K.T. Hammond has been adamant that he and fellow MPs had no plans to rush the Bill through Parliament.
Civil society organizations that are working with the RTI Media Coalition to push for the passing of the Bill include the Center for Democratic Development (CDD-Ghana), Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) Africa Office, Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII), Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition (GACC), PenPlusBytes, SEND-Ghana, Civil Society Platform on SDGs, Alliance for Women in Media Africa (AWMA) and Ghana Trades Union Congress (TUC)."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"94"	2018-12-10	"The Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, has given the assurance that Parliament would pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill before the end of session on Saturday, December 22.
“The bill has suffered sequential abortions, but like ‘Abiku’, it refuses to die. Parliament is resolved to pass the RTI Bill,” he said.
However, the Minister said, if the bill was not passed before the end of the session, it would definitely do so in the first two weeks of the next session. 
The RTI Bill has been in Parliament for the past eight years, but is currently still at the consideration stage.
Mr Kyei-Mensah Bonsu, who is also the Majority Leader, was speaking at a Dialogue with Civil Society Organisations’ programme on the theme ‘Interrogating Parliament’s Contribution to the Consolidation of Ghana’s Democracy Thus Far: The Perspective of CSO’.
The Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, as part of its mission to deepen inclusiveness in a participatory democracy, recognised the importance of Civil Society in the democratic process, especially in providing a vital link between citizens and the state.
The dialogue is being organised with the view to examine the performance of Ghana’s Parliament since 1993 in order to identify the strengths and weakness and provide a way forward into the next 25 years of Ghana’s democratic journey.
He said now that the 2019 budget and economic policy of government, and subsequently the consideration of the estimates of the various arms, organs and bodies of governance, as well as the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies are done, there was scant space for other businesses.
He said the mandate of the ministry was to interface the executive and the legislature on all fronts and to employ “soft power” by engendering consensus and inclusiveness with all state and non-state actors.
The Majority Leader said a robust Civil Society was necessary for the country’s democracy to thrive, adding that “the fact remains that CSOs activism is most relevant in an environment of a comparatively weak Parliament”.
He said in many jurisdictions in the developing world, governance or political authority is heavily tilted in favour of the Executive, and Parliament is emasculated.
Mr Kyei-Mensah Bonsu said civil society activism is required to balance the scale of rational power to protect the interest of the public.
“I strongly urge you all not to relent at this important stage of nationhood,” he said.
He said CSOs, by partnering with government and other stakeholder, could affect the nation’s consciousness and contribute to the quick evolution of the country’s democracy with far-reaching impact on the fortunes of the country.
Dr Evans Aggrey-Darkoh, the acting Chief Director of the Ministry for Parliamentary Affairs, said the ministry has an important vision to promote consensus among the citizenry to enhance participatory and representative democracy.
He said a strong Parliament is critical to the consolidation of Ghana’s democracy, and the stability and persistence of democracy and democratic principles ought to be concern of all.
“Democracy must enjoy legitimacy to the extent that both the elite and the masses believe that the democratic rule was the most appropriate system of rule,” he added.
He said in making democracy the only game in town attitudinally, behaviourally and constitutionally, no effort should be spared in making institutions of state, including Parliament, strong.
He said a strong Parliament is not only the one that makes laws but also resilient enough to check the overweening, overbearing and sometimes unlawful tendencies of the executive."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"95"	2018-12-07	"Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah Bonsu, the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, has given the assurance that Parliament would pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill before the end of the session on Saturday, December 22.
“The Bill has suffered sequential abortions but like ‘Abiku’, it refuses to die. Parliament is resolved to pass the RTI Bill,” he said.
However, the Minister said, if the Bill was not passed before the end of the session, it would definitely do so in the first two weeks of the next session. 
The RTI Bill has been in Parliament for the past 22 year but is currently still at the consideration stage.
Mr Kyei-Mensah Bonsu, who is also the Majority Leader, was speaking at a ‘Dialogue with Civil Society Organisations, programme on the theme: “Interrogating Parliament’s Contribution to the Consolidation of Ghana’s Democracy thus far: The Perspective of CSO.”
The Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs as part of its mission to deepen inclusiveness in a participatory democracy recognised the importance of Civil Society in the democratic process, especially in providing a vital link between citizens and the State.
The Dialogue is being organised with the view to examine the performance of Ghana’s Parliament, since 1993 in order to identify the strengths and weakness and provide a way forward into the next twenty-five years of Ghana’s democratic journey.
He said now that the 2019 budget and economic policy of government and subsequently, the consideration of the estimates of the various arms, organs and bodies of governance as well as the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies are done, there was scant space for other businesses.
He said the Mandate of the Ministry was to interface the Executive and the Legislature on all fronts and to employ “soft power” by engendering consensus and inclusiveness with all State and Non-State actors.
The Majority Leader said a robust Civil Society was necessary for the country’s democracy to thrive, adding that “the fact remains that CSOs activism is most relevant in an environment of a comparatively weak Parliament.”
He said in many jurisdictions in the developing world, governance or political authority is heavily tilted in favour of the Executive and Parliament is emasculated.
Mr Kyei-Mensah Bonsu said civil society activism is required to balance the scale of rational power to protect the interest of the public.
“I strongly urge you all not to relent at this important stage of nationhood,” he said.
He said CSOs by partnering with government and other stakeholder could affect the nation’s consciousness and contribute to the quick evolution of the country’s democracy with far reaching impact on the fortunes of the country.
Dr Evans Aggrey-Darkoh, the Acting Chief Director of the Ministry for Parliamentary Affairs, said the Ministry has an important vision to promote consensus among the citizenry to enhance participatory and representative democracy.
He said a strong Parliament is critical to the consolidation of Ghana’s democracy and the stability and persistence of democracy and democratic principles ought to be concern of all.
“Democracy must enjoy legitimacy to the extent that both the elite and the masses believe that the democratic rule was the most appropriate system of rule,” he added.
He said in making democracy the only game in town attitudinally, behaviourally and constitutionally, no effort should be spared in making institutions of State including Parliament strong.
He said a strong Parliament is not only the one that makes laws but also resilient enough to check the overweening, overbearing and sometimes unlawful tendencies of the Executives."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"96"	2018-12-06	"Parliament has set aside the first two weeks of its next meeting to pass the Right to Information Bill into Law should it fail to do so before it rises on Saturday 22 December.
Speaking at a dialogue between the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and Civil Society, Majority leader Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu said the House will try its best within the constraints of considering appropriations to pass the bill before it rises.
But if that fails, the House will dedicate the first two weeks of the next meeting which begins in January to work on finalizing the bill, the Majority leader who’s also the Parliamentary Affairs Minister added.
“After the presentation of the budget and economic policy of the government and the subsequent consideration of the estimates of the various arms, organs and bodies of government as well as all the MMDAs, there’s truly scant space for other businesses,” he said.
“We shall nonetheless strive to pass the RTI before we end this session on Saturday 22nd of December. Failing which I would assure that we shall then use the first two weeks of the next meeting to have the bill passed,” he added.
The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year and it has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
Parliament is under intense pressure by a pro-RTI group, the Media Coalition on Right to Information to pass the RTI bill. The Coalition was recently barred from entering the law-making chamber by police guards to press home their demand for the passage of the bill into law.
Some Members of Parliament warned bill when passed will render the country ungovernable.
“It is a recipe for disaster. It is a recipe for bad governance,” Member of Parliament for Asokwa, KT Hammond told Starr News in October.
“Ministers can’t operate, governments cannot proceed effectively, governance cannot take place meaningfully,” he added.
Also, the Member of Parliament Ningo Prampram Sam George described as a misplaced priority the demands of the Coalition for the bill to be passed into law.
The Centre for Democratic Development (CDD) believes that the delay in passing the bill is deliberate.
According to its, Deputy Director Dr Franklin Oduro “…If there’s one, or two or three things that the two main political parties [NPP and NDC] align agree to, then, it is this RTI that they don’t want.”
“I think that’s what it is,” Dr Oduro who is also the CDD’s Head of Research and Program said at a roundtable discussion on METOGU anti-corruption report in Accra recently"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"97"	2018-12-02	"This week's edition of Newsfile on Joynews featured all prominent stories that came under the spotlight in the course of the week.
The country's largest opposition party, NDC came under a barrage of attack after they announced a GHC400, 000 filing fee and a GHC20, 000 for picking a nomination form. Panellists on the show this week shared varied views and perspectives on the matter and provided insights into the possible repercussions for the party and policy matters.
Also discussed during the programme was the recent cases of power outages that have bedevilled the nation for the past weeks. Energy Minister in a series of media interviews assured the country of sustained power and blamed the situation on unforeseen technical hitches beyond their control. He subsequently took responsibility for it and stressed that the nation is far from returning to the dreaded days of 'dumsor'. But regular guest on the show, Abdul Malik Kweku Baako Junior suggested to that the current government has no excuse to fail Ghanaians on the issue of power generation and insisted that should such a thing as weeks or days of power outages occur again, the Minister, Peter Amewu ought to lose his job.
The attention of the host, Evans Mensah and guests for the show was focused on the issues arising from the creation of new regions. The Supreme Court in the course of the week dismissed a petition brought before it to interpret and declare as illegal the decision to restrict voting to only affected areas. Guests on the show urged the EC to expedite work on the election so the elections could take place without hitches. They also called on the Ministry for Regional Re-Integration to continue with the consultation among stakeholders to address any pending issues so as to forestall any friction that may arise.
The RTI Coalition also stepped up their advocacy and drive to get the RTI Bill passed before the end Parliament rises in December. The coalition argues it has been long overdue and that the country should have had one in place to ensure access to information. The issue, however, divided panellists as some were of the view that the RTI Coalition ought to be cautious with their actions and not stampede parliament in its work. The guests also noted that there are still outstanding issues with the RTI Bill in its current state that a rush to pass it may result in the essence of the Bill being defeated.
Watch a replay of this week's edition of Newsfile as the team delve into all the matters that made the headlines."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"98"	2018-12-02	"This week's edition of Newsfile on Joynews featured all prominent stories that came under the spotlight in the course of the week.
The country's largest opposition party, NDC came under a barrage of attack after they announced a GHC400, 000 filing fee and a GHC20, 000 for picking a nomination form. Panellists on the show this week shared varied views and perspectives on the matter and provided insights into the possible repercussions for the party and policy matters.
Also discussed during the programme was the recent cases of power outages that have bedevilled the nation for the past weeks. Energy Minister in a series of media interviews assured the country of sustained power and blamed the situation on unforeseen technical hitches beyond their control. He subsequently took responsibility for it and stressed that the nation is far from returning to the dreaded days of 'dumsor'. But regular guest on the show, Abdul Malik Kweku Baako Junior suggested to that the current government has no excuse to fail Ghanaians on the issue of power generation and insisted that should such a thing as weeks or days of power outages occur again, the Minister, Peter Amewu ought to lose his job.
The attention of the host, Evans Mensah and guests for the show was focused on the issues arising from the creation of new regions. The Supreme Court in the course of the week dismissed a petition brought before it to interpret and declare as illegal the decision to restrict voting to only affected areas. Guests on the show urged the EC to expedite work on the election so the elections could take place without hitches. They also called on the Ministry for Regional Re-Integration to continue with the consultation among stakeholders to address any pending issues so as to forestall any friction that may arise.
The RTI Coalition also stepped up their advocacy and drive to get the RTI Bill passed before the end Parliament rises in December. The coalition argues it has been long overdue and that the country should have had one in place to ensure access to information. The issue, however, divided panellists as some were of the view that the RTI Coalition ought to be cautious with their actions and not stampede parliament in its work. The guests also noted that there are still outstanding issues with the RTI Bill in its current state that a rush to pass it may result in the essence of the Bill being defeated.
Watch a replay of this week's edition of Newsfile as the team delve into all the matters that made the headlines."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"99"	2018-12-02	"This week's edition of Newsfile on Joynews featured all prominent stories that came under the spotlight in the course of the week.
The country's largest opposition party, NDC came under a barrage of attack after they announced a GHC400, 000 filing fee and a GHC20, 000 for picking a nomination form. Panellists on the show this week shared varied views and perspectives on the matter and provided insights into the possible repercussions for the party and policy matters.
Also discussed during the programme was the recent cases of power outages that have bedevilled the nation for the past weeks. Energy Minister in a series of media interviews assured the country of sustained power and blamed the situation on unforeseen technical hitches beyond their control. He subsequently took responsibility for it and stressed that the nation is far from returning to the dreaded days of 'dumsor'. But regular guest on the show, Abdul Malik Kweku Baako Junior suggested to that the current government has no excuse to fail Ghanaians on the issue of power generation and insisted that should such a thing as weeks or days of power outages occur again, the Minister, Peter Amewu ought to lose his job.
The attention of the host, Evans Mensah and guests for the show was focused on the issues arising from the creation of new regions. The Supreme Court in the course of the week dismissed a petition brought before it to interpret and declare as illegal the decision to restrict voting to only affected areas. Guests on the show urged the EC to expedite work on the election so the elections could take place without hitches. They also called on the Ministry for Regional Re-Integration to continue with the consultation among stakeholders to address any pending issues so as to forestall any friction that may arise.
The RTI Coalition also stepped up their advocacy and drive to get the RTI Bill passed before the end Parliament rises in December. The coalition argues it has been long overdue and that the country should have had one in place to ensure access to information. The issue, however, divided panellists as some were of the view that the RTI Coalition ought to be cautious with their actions and not stampede parliament in its work. The guests also noted that there are still outstanding issues with the RTI Bill in its current state that a rush to pass it may result in the essence of the Bill being defeated.
Watch a replay of this week's edition of Newsfile as the team delve into all the matters that made the headlines."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"100"	2018-11-30	" The Media Coalition on the Right to Information together with civil society groups including OccupyGhana will today, Friday, 30 November 2018 begin a street advocacy against the delay by parliament in passing the Right to Information Bill (RTI).
 Over 70 Civil Society Organisations are expected to participate in the exercise dubbed: #RTIRedFriday.
 The action begins a countdown to the Majority Leader’s recent promise that the bill will be passed before parliament rises this year.
 According to the Media Coalition on the Right to Information, today’s exercise will involve the distribution of RTI educational materials in Accra after which the leaders will proceed to parliament to observe the consideration of the RTI Bill."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"101"	2018-11-30	"A person with disability was denied access into the chamber of parliament on Friday, 30 November 2018 because, according to the security, he cannot stand on his feet as a sign of respect when the Speaker walks in.
It is a tradition for parliamentarians and all guests in the house to rise when the Speaker walks into the chamber to begin proceedings.
Mr Alex Tetteh, President of the Centre for Persons Living with Disability, said despite several pleas, he was prevented by the security personnel from entering the chamber.
The security, he said, argued that he could not rise to his feet when the Speaker walks in. He was asked to rather sit at the area for guests and watch the proceedings on television.
Mr Tetteh had joined members of the Media Coalition on the Right to Information to observe the consideration proceedings of the RTI Bill.
“I was sad. I cannot understand why I cannot enter because I’m a person with a disability”, Mr Tetteh told Class News’ parliamentary correspondent Ekow Annan, adding: “I did not cause my disability, it is no fault of mine and why should I be denied a right or access because I’m a person with disability”"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"102"	2018-11-27	"Some civil society organisations including Occupy Ghana have announced the start of a demonstration every Friday, starting November 30, 2018, against the delay in the passing of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
Dubbed #RTIRedFriday, the protest will see street advocacies and visits to Parliament on some selected days.
A release jointly signed by Media Coalition on Right to Information, the Coalition on Right to Information, Ghana and Occupy Ghana on Monday said the first street advocacy will see the distribution of RTI education materials.
This will be done at Obetsebi Lamptey Roundabout, Tudu-Accra Central, Tema Station, Accra Mall, Emmanuel Eye Clinic Traffic Lights, Ridge Roundabout, and Kwame Nkrumah Circle, all in the Greater Accra Region.
Speaker of Parliament Reverend Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye recently gave the assurance that RTI will be passed by close of year.
“The Right to Information Bill will be a thing of the past by end of this year. I can assure you, it will be done,” Speaker Oquaye assured.
RTI Bill will be passed before close of 2018 – Speaker of Parliament stresses
The release said the declaration of #RTIRedFriday “begins a countdown to the Rt. Hon. Speaker’s recent promise that the Bill would be passed before Parliament rises this year”.
On Friday, leadership of the coalition will also visit Parliament to observe the consideration stage of the Bill.
“We call on all Ghanaians across the country to wear anything RED on all these Fridays and post pictures in the RED attire on social media with the #RTIRedFriday to demonstrate to our elected Members of Parliament our collective resolve to get them to work in our interest as their employers, and not in their personal or political party interests as has been the case over the years so far as the passage of the RTI Bill is concerned.”"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"103"	2018-11-18	"So I understand Mr. K. T. Hammond, Honourable Member for Adansi-Asokwa in the Ashanti Region says he is unfazed by criticism from CSO on his efforts to disrupt the passage of the RTI bill. Further, he provides additional information on why he is opposed to this bill. He says that Clause 17 is the \"most dangerous of clauses in the bill.\" The statement further proves the honourable member does not understand the bill and does not understand the constitutional obligations that are imposed on him.
Clause 17 is what is referred to as a “public interest override” or the “harms test.” It is present in any good RTI law and international guidelines like the AU Model Law on Access to Information. Clause 17 is saying that in spite of the fact that the law has exempted certain types of information from disclosure because of national security, privacy, public health etc, information may still be disclosed \"if the benefits of disclosure outweighs the harm that would be caused if the information is disclosed'. A good example is a controversy over the US-Ghana Military Cooperation Agreement. Ordinarily, it will be exempt information under the RTI law because it has to do with defence. However, the public interest it generated and the questions raised over sovereignty meant that it was in the public interest to disclose it in spite of the fact that it was exempt information. In that instance, the benefits outweighs the harm of disclosure. 
Why is this provision important? It is important because it affirms the principles of democratic accountability. Article 21 (1) (f) guarantees the right to information and only limited to \"such qualifications and laws as are necessary for a democratic society\". All information generated in the public service belongs to the people in whom sovereignty resides. So anytime information has to be exempted from disclosure it must be in the public interest. That public interest test will have to establish even when an information has been withheld. It is not a given. This is what Clause 17 does.
Lastly, as a Member of Parliament, Mr. K. T. Hammond must understand that he is under a constitutional obligation to uphold and respect the Constitution under Article 12 (1) of the 1992 Constitution. So it is not a matter of choice whether to pass an RTI Bill, it is a constitutional duty. Therefore actions taken by Mr. Hammond to deny me and all Ghanaians, including himself our fundamental human rights is unacceptable and more importantly a violation of the constitution. What he should do as a Member of Parliament is to contribute his ideas to ensure the RTI Bill is credible and consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
My very last words. There are as many countries in the world including 22 African countries who have passed RTI laws and their governments have not come to a halt. In the coming days, I will share more information about the benefits of the RTI law before Parliament."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"104"	2018-11-16	" Excellent Ghana is appealing to President Nana Addo Dankwah Akufo-Addo to task both the Police and Military Command to apologize to the Editor of the Finder Newspaper, Mr Elvis Darko for illegitimately arresting him on Thursday, November 15 at the Parliament House.
 The Civil society organization finds the happenings embarrassing and offensive thereby has asked president Akufo-Addo to act in accordance with the Directive Principles of State, precisely, Article 35 (6a) and Clauses 7, 8 and 9 as the President of the Republic.
 “Excellent Ghana says the President cannot absolve himself albeit indirectly from this embarrassing dent by the Security Agencies. It, therefore, reminds the President to act in accordance with the Directive Principles of State Policy particularly Article 35 (6a) and Clauses 7, 8 and 9”, The Press Statement read.
 The Editor of the Finder Newspaper, Mr. Elvis Darko who doubles as a leading member of the Coalition for the passage of the Right To Information (RTI) Bill was arrested for picketing and whisked off.
 In a Press Release issued by Mr Carl Nii Addo stated that, the action taken by the Police and Military command was in sharp contrast to the very source of powers being exercised by the Security Agencies albeit a cowardiced approach at safeguarding the constitution.
 Excellent Ghana, quoting the words of President Akufo-Addo ‘be citizens and not spectators' hopes his administration would be the last government to dripple posterity by refusing to ensure the passage of the RTI bill in Parliament."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"105"	2018-11-16	" Some police and military personnel yesterday detained the editor of The Finder newspaper at Parliament Police Station, accusing him of taking photos of military personnel who destroyed a placard of a member of the Media Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) Bill in front of the Accra International Conference Centre (AICC).
 The policeman, who only gave his name as Chief Inspector Darkwa, argued that taking photos of security personnel discharging their duties was illegal. It all started when three police personnel at the gate of Parliament asked some members of the Media Coalition on RTI Bill who were standing on the pavement in front of AICC with placards urging the passage of RTI to leave the area.
 According to the police and military men, the place is part of State House, and therefore constitutes a security zone, and the order from above was for them to drive them away.
 The coalition members disagreed on grounds that earlier, police and military personnel on duty at the gate of AICC asked the coalition members to move a few steps away since the Vice-President was coming to the AICC for a function, to which they obliged, only for security personnel in front of the Parliament gate to insist they leave the area completely.
 During exchanges with the three police officers, one military person and a police officer alighted from a four-wheel drive and approached the group.
 They also insisted that members of the coalition should depart from the area.
 When the coalition members asked to know the reason behind that directive, the military personnel forcefully took a placard from one gentleman and broke it into pieces.
 The editor of The Finder, who was waiting on phone to grant an interview to a radio station, decided to abandon the interview and use his phone to take photos of the conduct of the military person.
 One police officer grabbed the hand of Elvis Darko in an attempt to take his phone, to which he resisted.
 The military person assisted the policeman to wrestle the phone from the editor of The Finder.
 After successfully taking away the phone, they asked Darko follow them to the Parliament Police Station.
 When they got to the gate of Parliament House, they asked him to board their four-wheel drive to the police station.
 Even though Darko told them he prefers to walk to the station, they demanded he board the vehicle, to which he obliged. At the police station, the police officer alighted and accompanied Darko to the entrance.
 The military person drove away while the policeman ordered The Finder editor to go to counter-back because he was under arrest.
 Darko obliged and requested to be given his phone to inform his employers that he has been arrested.
 The policeman refused on grounds that once arrested, a suspect loses his rights, adding that he has seized the phone because it was used to take photo of the military man.
 The police narrated the reason for the arrest to a female officer behind the counter, and in the process searched through Darko’s photo gallery to read some of the placards for the female officer to add to the reason for the arrest.
 The policeman then gave his name and phone number to the female officer behind the counter and left.
 A male officer, also behind the counter, asked for the name, place of work and phone number of Darko, and wrote them down.
 After that, he searched Darko from top to down and made him to remove everything in his pocket. When he was done, he asked Darko to put the items back into his pocket and take his seat.
 A little over 20 minutes, the Commander of the Parliament Police Station came in and invited Darko to his office.
 He explained that the coalition needed to inform the police as stated in the Public Order Act to be able to stand where the incident happened.
 He was of the view that the police have to notified of every public event because sometimes it is for the protection of the people holding that public event.
 At the tail end of the discussion, media practitioners from the Multimedia Group, led by Daniel Dadzie and Kojo Yankson, came to the police station to find out what was happening to Darko.
 They were invited to the commander’s office, and they took part in the discussions.
 When the commander claimed that Darko was not under arrest, Yankson and Dadzie asked him why Darko’s phone was still in the possession of the police.
 At this point, the commander called the staff behind the counter to bring Darko’s phone to him.
 After this, the commander explained further about the Public Order Act, and Darko was asked to leave by the commander.
 The Media Coalition on RTI has been in the forefront pushing for the passage of the almost two-decade-old bill into law."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"106"	2018-11-16	"Stories making headlines on the front pages in the major newspapers include:Daily Guide
* Amidu grabs GHc180 million to fight corruption
* Government unveils GHc73.4 billion for roads, railways, Free SHS, industries
* Fake doctor busted at KissemanThe Daily Statesman
* $2.5 billion infrastructure boost to spur growth and create jobs
* Special Prosecutor gets GHc180 million to fight corruption
*  Paid slaves: maids in the Middle East
* All change: Ghana's youth control democracy The New Weekend Crusading Guide
* State Housing Company to complete abandoned projects - Finance Minister
* Stop deceiving God's children; salvation not in creatures
* Massive development hits Sekyere East
* 2019 budget: SP, Masloc bag GHc380 million cash! The Finder
* 2019 budget: Deficit - 4.2% GDP - 7.6%
* Banking sector clean-up raises debt stock by 8.3%
* RTI Bill: How the police delt with Media Coalition
* Performance of economy in 2018 impressive - Finance Minister The Ghanaian Observer 
* 2019 budget dazes NDC as government unveils massive infrastructural development
* Oti Region vote will be incident free - Volta Police 
* Amidu grabs GHc180 million to fight corruption
*  Prophet Bohye cautions pastors ahead of Xmas
* Agona East School children denied mobile ICT vanThe Ghanaian Times
* Agenda for growth! 2019 budget focuses on massive infrastructural development
* Cheers, jeers greet 2019 budget statement
* Government to launch 'Rearing for food, jobs' 
* Key highlights of the 2019 budget statementThe Insight
* Surgeons warns women against contraceptives
* Military torment land owner
* 'Ghost names' Minister calls for criminal prosecution of public servants The Publisher 
* Amidu gets GHc180 million to fight corruption
* Collapsed banks cost government GHc9.9 billion 
* Government to embark on massive road projects"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"107"	2018-11-15	" Mr Elvis Darko, a member of the Interim Steering Committee of the Media Coalition on the Right to Information Bill (RTI), was arrested by the police on the premises of parliament on Thursday, 15 November 2018, for unlawful picketing.
 He has since been released by the Police.
 Read below his statement expanding why and how he was arrested…What Happened
 We were standing on the pavement in front of the Conference Centre opposite parliament house.
 Police and soldiers stationed at the gate of the Conference Centre asked that we move few steps away since Vice-President Dr Bawumia was coming to the Conference Centre for a function before going to parliament for budget presentation and we obliged.
 I started taking pictures of those holding the messages on RTI Bill.
 Then, about 3 police officers came and asked that we leave the place entirely.
 We asked for their reason and one of them said it is an order from above.
 Another one said the road and pavement where we were standing are all part of State House and constitutes a security zone.
 One of the police men called his commander to report to him.
 In the midst of the exchanges, the convoy of the Vice - President passed by to the conference centre.
 Immediately, another police personnel and a military personnel joined the exchanges.
 The military personnel then forcibly took the placard from Gilbert, crossed the road to parliament gate, broke the placards with his feet and dumped it into a dust bin.
 While this was happening, I was on my phone ready to grant interview to Neat FM.
 At this point, I cut the call from Neat FM in order to take photo of the military personnel destroying the placard.
 One police man held my hand shouting that I have no right to take photo of the military personnel or the police men.
 The military personnel joined the policeman to wrestle the phone from me.
 They then said they have arrested me.
 I told them I want to walk to the parliament police station and they rejected it.
 They ordered me to join their car to the police station in parliament.
 On our way, the military personnel said \"when you people go to take money from people, then you come and do these things. Go and lock him up\"
 When we got to the police station, the military personnel drove off.
 The police officer who said he is a chief inspector told those on duty why he arrested me and ordered me to sit at the counter back which I did.
 The statement was taken by a female police officer.
 The chief inspector actually went through my photo gallery on my phone to narrate the message on the placards since I took photos of some.
 I requested to make a call and the chief inspector who arrested me said \"once you are arrested you lose your rights\".
 So, he refused to give me my phone.
 One of the police personnel on duty asked my name, where I work and my phone number which I provided.
 He then searched me.
 I had to remove everything in my pocket.
 After he was satisfied, he asked me to put the items back into my pocket.
 It took over 20 minutes for the commander of the station to arrive.
 He invited me to his office and then explained the public order act and said we were required to inform the police about our action of standing on the pavement and displaying messages.
 According to him, it was important for us to inform the police for our safety since people with hidden motives could attack us or infiltrate our ranks and cause problem.
 In the midst of the Conversation, Daniel Dadzie and Kojo Yankson arrived to find out what was happening to me.
 The commander assured them that I was not arrested.
 The commander requested that my phone be brought to me.
 After some further interactions, I was allowed to go.
 Thank you all for your support
 RTI - Power To The Power (PTTP)
 Elvis Darko, Member of Interim Steering Committee - Media Coalition on RTI"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"108"	2018-11-14	" A leading member and advocate for the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill, Akoto Ampaw, has observed with worry the reluctance with which Parliament handles the bill, which is currently before the House for consideration.
 According to him, the attitude of Parliament dragging its feet with the passage of the bill into law poses a great danger.
 “An equally major danger is that, this Parliament, like the previous Parliament will dance about this matter and the term of Parliament will end and then when a new government and Parliament is elected, we will start all over again,” he observed in a interview with TV3.
 He noted there is the tendency of the legislative to massage the bill to the disadvantage of the public in whose interest the law must be passed.
 “The real danger has to do with the changes that Parliament may introduce weakening away the gains that may have been made in the current bill,” he said.
 The private legal practitioner has, therefore, called on civil society groups to pressurize President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo to push the Members of Parliament on his side to pass the bill.
 Lawyer Ampaw’s comments comes at a time the Media Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) and the RTI Coalition have accused the lawmakers of deliberately frustrating the passage of the bill, which has been pending for almost two decades.
 The groups observed since Parliament returned from recess, over 200 MPs deliberately absented themselves to sabotage the passage of RTI.
 But lawyer Ampaw maintained it is the right of Ghanaians to have access to public information and that the bill must be passed without any dilution.
 Meanwhile, the Speaker of Parliament has given assurance that the bill will be passed before the end of 2018."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"109"	2018-11-14	" Speaker of Parliament Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye has given the strongest indication yet that parliament will pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into an Act by close of 2018.
 Professor Oquaye disclosed this at a media engagement with some selected journalists in Accra on Monday, November 12.
 According to the Speaker, Parliament is focused on passing the Bill; hence, it will do all it can for the Bill to be passed before the year ends.
 “The Right to Information Bill will be a thing of the past by end of this year. I can assure you, it will be done,” he stressed.
 “The budget will come, we will deal with the budget, and at the same time RTI will be a thing of the past by the end of this year,” Professor Mike Oquaye assured.
 There have been many concerns raised about the failure on the part of successive Parliaments to pass the RTI bill into law to allow citizens, most importantly, journalists get access to information regarding state issues.
 The RTI Bill has been before Parliament for over a decade, with all attempts to get the Bill passed failing.
 Journalists across the country have been at the forefront of crusade to getting the RTI enacted, as it is very crucial to their work as people who serve as a link between government and the masses.
 Pushing this agenda under an umbrella body, ‘Media Coalition on RTI’, the group has written several petitions and embarked on demonstrations to register their disappointment in Parliament for not passing the Bill.
 On October, 30, 2018, the Coalition stormed the premises of Parliament to get the legislators to place premium on ratifying the Bill, but they were prevented from entering the main chamber for wearing branded T-Shirts.
 Despite their inability to get through to the legislature, the Media Coalition on RTI still remains adamant, and has promised to use all available legitimate means to get the Bill passed.
 With the latest assurance from the Speaker of Parliament, perhaps the Coalition can heave a sigh of relief, with the hope that true to the Speaker’s words, the RTI Bill will be passed before 2019."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"110"	2018-11-14	" The Member of Parliament for Adansi Asokwa, Mr. K. T. Hammond has said he stands by his comments that the passage of the Right to Information Bill will not inure to the benefit of the country.
 Mr Hammond has been criticised by pressure group OccupyGhana and a group of media personnel known as the Media Coalition on RTI, for opposing the RTI bill which will guarantee unfettered access to information.
 Arguably the oldest bill, it has been in and out of parliament for close to two decades.
 Mr Hammond’s position is that, if passed, the law will be a “disaster” and a recipe for “bad governance” in the country.
 “[The RTI] is a recipe for disaster, it’s a recipe for bad governance. Tony Blair went on to tell the whole world how stupid he was for bringing the RTI bill, knowing how belatedly the implications were. He said they were wrong, it was one useless piece of legislation that he passed and he is very upset about it and we learn from history. We sit down here and we don’t want to learn from history, so fine let's go ahead”, Mr Hammond told journalists.
 Pressure group, OccupyGhana, for example, has said Mr Hammond’s fears are antiquated and out of sync with modern day democratic tenets. The group believes the lawmaker does not understand the RTI bill.
 In response, Mr Hammond said he stands by his position.
 “What I’ve found a little bit more disappointing was when one suggested that they didn’t think I had the document and they didn’t think I had understood it. That is below the belt. They [CSOs] should give me a little bit more credit.
 “They may not like my views but to suggest that I do not know a thing about RTI is a bit unfair. I did not expect that they will clap for me. I knew that this Bill will not inure to the benefit of the entire country. I have suggested that this is a Bill that the media is interested in and I stand by it. Criticise me, but give me a little bit more credit,” he told Class News."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"111"	2018-11-13	" It has now emerged that majority of Ghanaian Members of Parliament (MPs) are not interested in the passage of the Right to Information Bill (RTI) into law.
 The Media Coalition on the RTI that made this observation says more than 200 MPs have for the beginning of Third Meeting demonstrated their lack of interest in the passage of the bill by their continuous absence on the floor of the House whenever the bill comes up for consideration.
 In a statement released on Monday, the Media Coalition on the Right to Information Bill said they consider the actions of the MPs as deliberate strategy to once again frustrate the passage of the bill into law.
 “Ever since Parliament returned from recess, over 200 Members of Parliament are consistently absent from the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration. It is on record that only between 30 and 50 MPs are in the Chamber anytime the RTI is up for consideration in the past two weeks”, the statement released by the Coalition in part read.
 The deliberate attempts by the MPs to frustrate the passage of the RTI Bill into law, according to the Media Coalition, is worsened by the lack of seriousness shown by the leadership of the House.
 “This bad practice is giving credence to public suspicions that a high number of MPs are against the passage of the RTI Bill but do not want to openly say so”, the statement noted.Below is the full statement:
 Over 200 MPs abandon RTI Bill.
 The Media Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) and the RTI Coalition have noticed the lackadaisical attitude of Members of Parliament (MPs) towards the RTI Bill.
 In our view, this constitutes a deliberate strategy to once again frustrate the passage of the Bill into law.
 Ever since parliament returned from recess, over 200 Members of Parliament are consistently absent from the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration.
 It is on record that only between 30 and 50 MPs are in the chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration in the past two weeks.
 The New Patriotic Party (NPP) Member of Parliament (MP) for Adansi Asokwa, Kobina Tahiru Hammond, who has openly said that he is against the law has taken advantage of the situation to stop the House from considering the Bill by raising the issue of quorum.
 He has found a strong ally in Samuel Nartey George, the National Democratic Congress (NDC) MP for Ningo-Prampram, who has also resorted to the quorum call to frustrate the consideration of the Bill.
 A third of the 275 legislators, which stands at 92 are needed to form a quorum in the House.
 In view of these negative developments, the Media Coalition on RTI petitioned the leadership of Parliament to adopt extended sittings to ensure that the Bill is passed before Parliament rises for the Christmas break.
 To our surprise, the leadership of parliament has not considered our request necessary and therefore did not show any seriousness as usual.
 There were only 2 days of extended sittings and both ended before 4PM.
 We are minded by the fact that Parliament has sat on Monday’s, weekends and sometimes late into the night just to pass some laws in this country and to approve of loan agreements.
 Therefore, the ongoing absenteeism anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration is unacceptable.
 This bad practice is giving credence to public suspicions that a high number of MPs are against the passage of the RTI Bill but do not want to openly say so.
 At the beginning of the current meeting on October 30, 2018, the Majority Leader, Osei Kyei-Mensah- Bonsu, gave the assurance that the House would pass the RTI Bill into law before it rises in December, 2018. He actually said the leadership was committed to finishing work on the bill before November 15th, 2018 when the budget will be presented to the house.
 It is sad that parliament is not worried that its Leader of Government Business has made promises to the people of Ghana but the actions of the House suggests that our MPs see themselves as lords over those who elected them and therefore can renege on their promises at will.
 The RTI Bill has passed through the first and second readings and is at the consideration stage, with 138 amendments mostly substitution or deletion of words proposed to be considered by the House.
 Background
 The object of the RTI Bill is to provide for the operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society.
 It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and to provide for related matters.
 The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010. It was brought back to the Sixth Parliament but could not be passed till the expiration of that Parliament on January 6, 2016.
 After months of waiting, the Bill was laid in Parliament early this year (2018) by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Joseph Dindiok Kpemka.
 *****#PassItNow*****"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"112"	2018-11-13	"The Media Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) and the Right to Information (RTI) Coalition has observed with great concerns the deliberate laid-back attitudes of Members of Ghana Parliament towards the passage of Right to Information Bill. 
Observing from the various bills which Ghana Parliament has treated with utmost serious, the Media Coalition on RTI has noticed that the RTI Bill which forms the fundamental human rights of Ghanaians is being intentionally frustrated by Parliamentarians who ought to seek the interest of their constituents from becoming a law.
“Ever since Parliament returned from recess, over 200 Members of Parliament are constantly absent from the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration. It is on record that only between 30 and 50 MPs are in the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration in the past two weeks”, the Coalition stated.
According to the Media Coalition on RTI, the New Patriotic Party (NPP) Member of Parliament (MP) for Adansi Asokwa, Kobina Tahiru Hammond, who has openly opposed the law has taken advantage of the situation to stop the House from considering the Bill by raising the issue of quorum.
He has found a strong ally in Samuel Nartey George, the National Democratic Congress (NDC) MP for Ningo-Prampram, who has also resorted to the quorum call to frustrate the consideration of the Bill.Read Below The Full StatementOver 200 MPs Abandon RTI Bill.
The Media Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) and the RTI Coalition have noticed the lackadaisical attitude of Members of Parliament (MPs) towards the RTI Bill. 
In our view, this constitutes a deliberate strategy to once again frustrate the passage of the Bill into law. 
Ever since parliament returned from recess, over 200 Members of Parliament are consistently absent from the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration. 
It is on record that only between 30 and 50 MPs are in the chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration in the past two weeks. 
The New Patriotic Party (NPP) Member of Parliament (MP) for Adansi Asokwa, Kobina Tahiru Hammond, who has openly said that he is against the law has taken advantage of the situation to stop the House from considering the Bill by raising the issue of quorum. 
He has found a strong ally in Samuel Nartey George, the National Democratic Congress (NDC) MP for Ningo-Prampram, who has also resorted to the quorum call to frustrate the consideration of the Bill. 
A third of the 275 legislators, which stands at 92 are needed to form a quorum in the House. 
In view of these negative developments, the Media Coalition on RTI petitioned the leadership of Parliament to adopt extended sittings to ensure that the Bill is passed before Parliament rises for the Christmas break. 
To our surprise, the leadership of parliament has not considered our request necessary and therefore did not show any seriousness as usual. 
There were only 2 days of extended sittings and both ended before 4PM. 
We are minded by the fact that Parliament has sat on Monday’s, weekends and sometimes late into the night just to pass some laws in this country and to approve of loan agreements. 
Therefore, the ongoing absenteeism anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration is unacceptable. 
This bad practice is giving credence to public suspicions that a high number of MPs are against the passage of the RTI Bill but do not want to openly say so.
At the beginning of the current meeting on October 30, 2018, the Majority Leader, Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, gave the assurance that the House would pass the RTI Bill into law before it rises in December, 2018. 
He actually said the leadership was committed to finishing work on the bill before November 15th, 2018 when the budget will be presented to the house. 
It is sad that parliament is not worried that its Leader of Government Business has made promises to the people of Ghana but the actions of the House suggests that our MPs see themselves as lords over those who elected them and therefore can renege on their promises at will. 
The RTI Bill has passed through the first and second readings and is at the consideration stage, with 138 amendments mostly substitution or deletion of words proposed to be considered by the House. 
Background 
The object of the RTI Bill is to provide for the operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society. 
It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and to provide for related matters. 
The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010. It was brought back to the Sixth Parliament but could not be passed till the expiration of that Parliament on January 6, 2016. 
After months of waiting, the Bill was laid in Parliament early this year (2018) by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Joseph Dindiok Kpemka."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"113"	2018-11-13	"The Media Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) and the RTI Coalition have through a joint statement slammed parliament for it's lackadaisical approach towards the passage of the RTI bill. 
The statement which was issued today decried the deliberate attempt by the House to prevent the bill from being passed. 
The statement also mentioned Mr KT hammond, the MP for Adansi Asokwa and Ningo Prampram MP, Samuel Nartey George, and their deliberate attempts to frustrate the RTI bill. 
\"Ever since parliament returned from recess, over 200 Members of Parliament are consistently absent from the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration. 
It is on record that only between 30 and 50 MPs are in the chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration in the past two weeks. 
The New Patriotic Party (NPP) Member of Parliament (MP) for Adansi Asokwa, Kobina Tahiru Hammond, who has openly said that he is against the law has taken advantage of the situation to stop the House from considering the Bill by raising the issue of quorum. 
He has found a strong ally in Samuel Nartey George, the National Democratic Congress (NDC) MP for Ningo-Prampram, who has also resorted to the quorum call to frustrate the consideration of the Bill,\" the statement read. Read below the full statement 12th November, 2018. 
Press statement for immediate release Over 200 MPs abandon RTI Bill. 
The Media Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) and the RTI Coalition have noticed the lackadaisical attitude of Members of Parliament (MPs) towards the RTI Bill. 
In our view, this constitutes a deliberate strategy to once again frustrate the passage of the Bill into law. Ever since parliament returned from recess, over 200 Members of Parliament are consistently absent from the Chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration. 
It is on record that only between 30 and 50 MPs are in the chamber anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration in the past two weeks. 
The New Patriotic Party (NPP) Member of Parliament (MP) for Adansi Asokwa, Kobina Tahiru Hammond, who has openly said that he is against the law has taken advantage of the situation to stop the House from considering the Bill by raising the issue of quorum.
 He has found a strong ally in Samuel Nartey George, the National Democratic Congress (NDC) MP for Ningo-Prampram, who has also resorted to the quorum call to frustrate the consideration of the Bill. 
A third of the 275 legislators, which stands at 92 are needed to form a quorum in the House. 
In view of these negative developments, the Media Coalition on RTI petitioned the leadership of Parliament to adopt extended sittings to ensure that the Bill is passed before Parliament rises for the Christmas break. 
To our surprise, the leadership of parliament has not considered our request necessary and therefore did not show any seriousness as usual. There were only 2 days of extended sittings and both ended before 4PM. 
We are minded by the fact that Parliament has sat on Monday’s, weekends and sometimes late into the night just to pass some laws in this country and to approve of loan agreements. 
Therefore, the ongoing absenteeism anytime the RTI Bill is up for consideration is unacceptable. This bad practice is giving credence to public suspicions that a high number of MPs are against the passage of the RTI Bill but do not want to openly say so. 
At the beginning of the current meeting on October 30, 2018, the Majority Leader, Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu, gave the assurance that the House would pass the RTI Bill into law before it rises in December, 2018. 
He actually said the leadership was committed to finishing work on the bill before November 15th, 2018 when the budget will be presented to the house. It is sad that parliament is not worried that its Leader of Government Business has made promises to the people of Ghana but the actions of the House suggests that our MPs see themselves as lords over those who elected them and therefore can renege on their promises at will. 
The RTI Bill has passed through the first and second readings and is at the consideration stage, with 138 amendments mostly substitution or deletion of words proposed to be considered by the House. 
Background 
The object of the RTI Bill is to provide for the operationalisation of the constitutional right to information held by public and some private institutions, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of public interest in a democratic society. 
It also seeks to foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs and to provide for related matters. 
The RTI Bill was first drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was only presented to Parliament in 2010. 
It was brought back to the Sixth Parliament but could not be passed till the expiration of that Parliament on January 6, 2016. 
After months of waiting, the Bill was laid in Parliament early this year (2018) by the Deputy Attorney General and Minister of Justice, Joseph Dindiok Kpemka. 
*****#PassItNow*****"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"114"	2018-11-13	"Stories making headlines on the front pages in the major newspapers include:Daily Guide
* Work begins on Adenta footbridges today
* Nana flies to Qatar
* NPP warns MP aspirants
* GRA arrests 4 over diversion
* NDC race gets dirty - Allotey fights Asiedu NketiaDaily Graphic
* Government bags GHc12 billion from import duties
* Government will sustain free SHS funding - GES Director-General
* Free Senior High School; Rich must pay Ghanaian Times 
* Financing Free SHS: Rich parents must pay - Prof. Aryeetey
* CID quizzes Kojo Bonsu over $1.7 million theft case
* NDC flays President over corruption
* Madina-Adenta residents mount pressure on government for construction of footbridges The New Crusading Guide 
* Veep celebrates 60th anniversary with Nalerigu Baptist Medical Centre
* Who leads NDC?
* Asiedu Nketia faces Koku Anyidoho over 9,350 delegates to decide
* Police intercepts 1500 pieces of ammunition in Bimbila
* We support fight against smuggling of goods - Free Zones AuthorityThe Finder 
* NIA: 14,888 registered at Adentan in the first week of the exercise
* 0ver 200 MPs abandon RTI Bill
* Free SHS: Gold Track takes off smoothly
* 6 contractors visit Madina-Pantang Highway to begin work on bridges The Chronicle
* Pay us as house wives
* Oguaa minors smoke 'wee' with impunity
* NPP warns party execs not to tamper with albums
* Ebo Quansah writes to Togbe AfedeThe Insight
* Charlotte Osei issues arising out of her removal with two others
* Double-Track SHS students unhappy
* Stonebwoy increases at Ghana's Sea Ports"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"115"	2018-11-12	"Speaker of Parliament Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye has given the strongest indication yet that parliament will pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into an Act by close of 2018.
Professor Oquaye disclosed this at a media engagement with some selected journalists in Accra on Monday, November 12.
According to the Speaker, Parliament is focused on passing the Bill; hence, it will do all it can for the Bill to be passed before the year ends.
“The Right to Information Bill will be a thing of the past by end of this year. I can assure you, it will be done,” he stressed.
“The budget will come, we will deal with the budget, and at the same time RTI will be a thing of the past by the end of this year,” Professor Mike Oquaye assured.
There have been many concerns raised about the failure on the part of successive Parliaments to pass the RTI bill into law to allow citizens, most importantly, journalists get access to information regarding state issues.
The RTI Bill has been before Parliament for over a decade, with all attempts to get the Bill passed failing.
Journalists across the country have been at the forefront of crusade to getting the RTI enacted, as it is very crucial to their work as people who serve as a link between government and the masses.
Pushing this agenda under an umbrella body, ‘Media Coalition on RTI’, the group has written several petitions and embarked on demonstrations to register their disappointment in Parliament for not passing the Bill.
On October, 30, 2018, the Coalition stormed the premises of Parliament to get the legislators to place premium on ratifying the Bill, but they were prevented from entering the main chamber for wearing branded T-Shirts.
Despite their inability to get through to the legislature, the Media Coalition on RTI still remains adamant, and has promised to use all available legitimate means to get the Bill passed.
With the latest assurance from the Speaker of Parliament, perhaps the Coalition can heave a sigh of relief, with the hope that true to the Speaker’s words, the RTI Bill will be passed before 2019."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"116"	2018-11-11	"Something extraordinary happened last Monday which captures our collective mental state with reference to the issue of corruption in public affairs.
The Eastern Regional director of the Economic and Organised Crime Office was suspended by his boss from Accra for merely saying that pursuing current acts of corruption would be far better than concentrating, as is the norm today, on the acts of corruption committed by functionaries of the previous government. 
This immediate response and high-handed action of the national EOCO graphically illustrates that the fight against corruption is a meaningless shadow fight. 
It is a loud and noisy fight being pursued for propaganda purposes, and not to retrieve stolen or deliberately misapplied public resources. Note well that the Eastern Region EOCO boss never suggested or said that past acts of corruption must be forgotten, or overlooked.
At the rate and zeal the state is pursuing the Woyome millions allegedly lost in the time of the late President, Professor John Atta Mills, it is certain the influential citizens in the financial world being pursued today for their role in the collapse of banks only last and this year, the loss of thousands of jobs by innocent citizens and the misappropriation of depositors funds, would not see justice this side of eternity. 
Remember the Woyome affair began in the time of former President Kufuor and you will begin to grasp my concerns today. You can only imagine the substantial sums spent in investigating past corrupt acts. All for what?
How much of our monies were retrieved from functionaries of the President Nkrumah regime after the 1966 coup which overthrew his government? The same goes for the politicians who faced probes after the 1972 coup which ousted Prime Minister Kofi Busia from office. 
The last successful coup by President Rawlings in December 1981, was even more farcical; the revolutionary government was more interested in staying in power than validating its existence with shortcomings of the Limann regime. 
Nkrumah and Busia era politicians faced the potent sanction of disqualification from active politics, which affected the line up of functionaries in 1979.
 Disqualification from public office was not an option when we entered the 4th Republic in 1993. 
 The idea for today became clear to me after realising that I am not alone in believing certain things which detract from our political economic and social development as a nation. 
For example the short piece last week by the well-known lawyer Akoto-Ampaw on the attacks on the Attorney-General, Madam Gloria Akuffo, for her allegedly lax approach to the prosecution of corrupt functionaries of the now opposition National Democratic Congress (NDC). 
Of course, I disagree with the lawyer in one aspect; it is the higher political party functionaries who preach and scream corruption of current political office holders when seeking office themselves, not the ignorant footsoldiers and apparachiki. The latter only repeat.
I think this is exactly where my concern today is located. It appears from the concentration on the functionaries of past preceding government and the evangelical zeal against corruption, that the whole corruption matter has become one of self-moralising, not meaningful action against a canker where successful prosecution is more likely when the records are fresh and current, and the lessons are learnt at once. 
The fight against the canker has now become merely, we are better than you in governance and the protection of the public purse because our current and serving appointees are clean and honest men and women because we have cleared them of all allegations but declined to publish the basis for their clearance. 
Fighting corruption today, the language tactics and actual preparatory actions like the hailed appointment of the Special Prosecutor has become only a propaganda tool. 
How much in stolen public resources have been retrieved since the beginning of this 4th Republic? Even more important, how much of our resources have been spent, or wasted on allegations, investigations and prosecutions? 
And the example of President Kufuor pardoning all who were convicted and trials aborted, proves that this is all a sham perpetrated to sustain the ruling government in power and not to develop our sense of genuine outrage.
The stone age views of Mr KT Hammond regarding the Right to Information bill captures perfectly my concerns about the fakery of the anti-corruption campaign and fight.
Not a single government in the world has collapsed because of the successful passage of RTI, but he religiously believes that the very concept of government is threatened by a sunshine legislation like this which can arrest acts of corruption and financial malfeasance right in the acts of commission. 
A public office is a public trust and citizens are entitled to be aware of all actions taken in their name by the trustees who are temporary custodians of delegated authority. To imagine this RTI bill has been in our parliament since 2003 amidst grandstanding by parties and individuals says a lot about our real commitment to exposing and fighting corruption in public life.
Which takes me to the title for today. Get yourself appointed as a co-ordinator of proceeds from a public toilet and you would be accused of corruption by fellow party members who missed the lucrative appointment and their supporters. 
Get an appointment as a managing director of a parastatal especially when your partisan zeal was absent in the prior campaign and you would be tarred and feathered with the rankest charges of corruption and footsoldier disdain. 
The root cause we face is ultimately the umbilical linkage of political and public office with rank corruption, no matter how far removed the appointment itself is from actual handling of public resources, something the current ruling party excelled in prior to its victory in 2016 presidential and parliamentary elections. 
Everybody was accused of corruption, or stomach politics, including pastors who expressed their support publicly. No one serves for the purpose of love of service to fellow men and women but for personal gain at the expense of public welfare.
The opposite of development is not corruption; it is incompetent governance. Many obstacles have been overcome in the fight to develop our country. Nations develop with current assets not retrieved alleged stolen monies. 
For the fight against corruption and wanton dissipation of public resources to be meaningful and sincere, we must move away from concentrating on prehistoric crimes which teaches no lessons, retrieves no assets, builds nothing except excuse-making pharisees in governance, and come to the present where two useful national purposes can be taught all of us. 
That firstly that corruption prevents current losses and secondly teaches useful lessons for the future. Its long past the time we stopped criminalising political office holding."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"117"	2018-11-11	"“All persons shall have the right to information, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society” 
– Article 21(1) (f), 1992 Constitution.
The Fourth Republican Constitution of Ghana (the 1992 Constitution), and the Parliament established under it, is about 25 years old. The Constitution has vested the legislative power of Ghana in Parliament.
This means that, except otherwise provided by the Constitution, only Parliament has the legal authority to enact laws or it can delegate other persons (natural and unnatural) to do so on its behalf within the limits of the Constitution. 
Although Parliament has immensely contributed to the growth and development of democracy and good governance in Ghana since 1993 when the Constitution came into effect, it continues to demonstrate a lacklustre commitment towards the passage of the Right to Information Bill (RTI) Bill. 
The RTI Bill has been lying in the womb of the House for about 19 years. Does the Ghanaian Parliament need a Caesarean Section to pass the bill?
Article 21(1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution guarantees the right of all persons to information, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society. The RTI Bill mainly seeks to give flesh to the foregoing article by providing for access to official information held by public institutions, subject to public interests and freedom of others . 
Right to information is central to the active participation by all in the governance of Ghana.  This is because it only takes well informed people, who have access to relevant data or information, to contribute meaningfully to the good governance of their country.  
Access to requisite data and information will, among others, reduce corruption and ensure truthfulness and transparency in governance. 
It has been observed that the various bodies in Ghana’s criminal justice system have not shown enough commitment to prosecute corrupt public officials, because the structure lacks transparency to fight corruption.  
Despite the foregoing benefits that Ghana stands to get from the passage of the RTI Bill, it has taken its Parliament more than 19 years to pass the Bill into law. Parliament’s cold feet towards the passage of the bill raises several legitimate questions about its focus and interests.
Is it the case that Ghanaian political leaders are dreading the kind of public scrutiny that they might be subjected to when the Bill is passed into law? 
If that is the case, then wherein lies their commitment towards transparency in government and the fight against corruption?  Is it true that “government will no longer have secrets if Parliament passes the RTI Bill into?”  A Member of Parliament (MP), Mr K.T Hammond, was recently reported to have said that and I would like to ask him: “Please what kind of government secrets are you talking about?”
A closer reading of articles 12(2) and 21(1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution and other relevant provisions reveal that right to information is not a blank cheque. The Majority Leader, Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, this question goes to you: Did you say that you do “not want Parliament pressured into passing the bill?” 
Please what else should Ghanaians expect if Parliament still appears to be playing rhetoric with a bill that was drafted in 1999? Is pressure not necessary whenever persuasion fails? I believe the growing mounting pressure on Parliament is a good Caesarean Section required to do the needful. 
It is necessary to stress that Parliament needs to place national interests above personal or political interests in its dealings with Ghanaians in relation with the passage of the RTI Bill into law. Ghanaians have since 1992 chosen to be ruled by law, not by political interests. 
Right to information is not a mere political promise nor a populist political propaganda; it is a constitutionally guaranteed right. There is everything wrong with the motives of any pregnant woman who refuses to give birth when her time is due. Even more so, when she is resisting a Caesarean section."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"118"	2018-11-08	"The Media Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill has question the commitment of Members of Parliament in passing the over decade-old bill, and urged Ghanaians to begin to demand answers from their MPs.
The posture of the 275 MPs, according to the coalition that is spearheading a campaign for the passage of the RTI, clearly demonstrates they are not ready to pass the bill into law.
For the second time in less than a week, the consideration of the RTI Bill by parliament was brought to a halt by Parliament on grounds that the House did not have quorum to deliberate on the matter.
On the two occasions,  the MP for Adansi Asokwa, K.T. Hammond, who the Coalition describe as “a sworn opponent to the Bill” raised the issue of quorum.
Per parliamentary Standing Order 48 (2): “If at the time of sitting, a member takes notice or objection that there are present in the House, besides the person presiding, less than one-third of the number of all the Members of Parliament, and after an interval of ten minutes a quorum is not present, the person presiding shall adjourn the House without question put until the next sitting day”.
Article 102 stipulates that: “A quorum of Parliament, apart from the one presiding, shall be one-third of all Members of Parliament”.
At the time the Bill came up for consideration on the floor of the House Wednesday, only 43 MPs, including the 2nd Deputy Speaker who was presiding at the time, were in the chamber. Of the 169 majority MPs, only 21 were present and in the case of the minority, there were only 22 MPs as against the total of 106.
Commenting on the development, a leading member of the Coalition, Elvis Darko, said this situation indicates the parliamentarians are not ready to pass the Bill which will help journalist work effectively because it will offer them unfettered access to information, except in a few instances.
“Parliament is not committed to the passage; they don’t want the law and their behaviour shows they are not ready to pass the bill,” he said on Yen Sempa on Onua FM Thursday morning.
“If there are 275 and they are not able to form quorum of 92, then they are not ready,” he stated, adding “they can even sit until 9:00pm to pass some bills and they demonstrated it through their actions”.
Mr. Darko thus urged Ghanaians to begin to question their MPs on why they are engaging in feet-dragging on the issue of the RTI bill.
“If it were to be in the interest of the MPs, they would have lobbied for the MPs to come and pass the Bill. If the government wants loan, they would have come to pass so we should ask our MPs questions,” he urged."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"119"	2018-11-05	"No matter where you stand on the political spectrum, Npp or Ndc, upper-class or lower-class, rich or poor, you will still get hit — at least once, in your lifetime — by the heavy blows of corruption. I do not know the origin nor the etymology of corruption, but I do know that corruption is a man-made product, not divine. From breaking down our healthcare system to denying people their right to education and sports, destroying our talents and crushing down our institutions. Corruption has killed thousands of people in Islands, mainlands and hinterlands. Not just that, the canker has torn families apart and have left families with famine. Could this be the reason why we appear to be fighting against it? We all know the answer. But the question is, have we made any progress, so far, in our fight against the menace? The answer is clear.
A plethora of methods have been adopted for fighting corruption: the traditional method, where chiefs are the justices; the law court system, naming and shaming by investigative journalists, etc. And now we talking about the office of the special prosecutor and the RTI bill. But, referring to the recent hue and cry raised by the special prosecutor about the unwillingness of some government officials to make available, documents needed to aid in prosecution coupled with the decades of hibernation of the RTI bill in parliament as some evidence, tens of thousands, running into millions, of Ghanaians are now seeing some particles of truth in the words of the cynics, which verbalize that the motive for the setting up of the office of the special prosecutor and the RTI bill were defeated the very day they were conceived. Alas, reports show that the canker keeps touching and winning more souls, and its effects keep multiplying. Should we sit unconcerned while corruption nibbles us to death? But is there any panacea at all for corruption?
Education is not just an equalizer; education is the perfect cure for corruption. It is the tool that was used in building the Singaporean army. The father of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yu, observed earlier that economic and social progress, and military might are not the natural order of things. But depend on relentless effort on the part of government and citizens. He understood that to build an army, he needed to re-orientate his people’s minds (minds that detested military due to certain precedence) through education and get them to like soldiering. This worked perfectly for Singapore, a former dejected British colony that transmogrified from third world into a modern metropolis. And since we believe in the Singaporean story, we can tell the story in our own way with our own words under our own circumstances. Do you know that no Ghanaian president nor finance minister ever was or is incompetent? But corruption makes them appear so. Let’s get it right, education is not just about learning mathematics and management. Facts and non-facts. Education is about learning values, and learning to hold on to characters that will allow economic principles and economic modules to function.
As we find ourselves at the crossroads in our journey of fighting corruption — after having tried diverse abortive methods — we can only adapt education as the tool to curtail the canker. This is not to suggest that the preceding methods should be shunned, no. It should complement solemn education. It is allowed not to have a particular knowledge on a particular issue at a particular point in time. But the time is now for us to realize that no amount of fine laws can unleash us from the grips of corruption until we fine-tune our minds. Yes, laws do we work properly in other places, but it works because the people have been conscientized. I cannot discharge justice justly if I share the same defects with the culprits. To defeat corruption, the Ministry of education must come up with a curriculum that will capture corruption as a subject — which will span the causes of corruption, catalogue of corrupt practices, and consequences of corruption, etc. — and teach it at basic, secondary and at the University level. This is the most compelling and realistic way we can effectively and efficiently retire corruption or reduce it to the barest minimum. This alongside sincere and effective multimedia public campaign could be a useful tool for fighting the threat. Because it is very common that people routinely engaged in corrupt practices without knowing. Much like extinguishing fire, fighting corruption should be done bottom up. Prevention is better than cure is a terrible cliché, I agree. But I tell you what, prevention is better than cure. Thus, instead of waiting to prosecute fully-fledged criminals after they’ve injured the country, it is more logical if people are re-molded to perceive and accept corruption as their greatest enemy — and the truth is, it is our greatest enemy — at their early ages of life. This way, we can create a new generation of non-fictitious honorable men and women who will take Ghana to greatness. This might sound a little bit theoretical, but in my journey, I have learnt that it is a theory that matures into a law. Hence there is prospect in this proposed path. Remember, it is the attitude of man not the aptitude that determines his altitude.
Allow me, therefore, to end with the words of the Argentine revolutionary, Ernesto Che Guevara: ‘‘Seguimos en combate hasta la Victoria siempre.’’"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"120"	2018-11-04	"No matter where you stand on the political spectrum, NPP or NDC, upper-class or lower-class, rich or poor, you will still get hit — at least once, in your lifetime — by the heavy blows of corruption. I do not know the origin nor the etymology of corruption, but I do know that corruption is a man-made product, not divine. From breaking down our healthcare system to denying people their right to education and sports, destroying our talents and crushing down our institutions. Corruption has killed thousands of people in Islands, mainlands and hinterlands. Not just that, the canker has torn families apart and have left families with famine. Could this be the reason why we appear to be fighting against it? We all know the answer. But the question is, have we made any progress, so far, in our fight against the menace? The answer is clear.
A plethora of methods have been adopted for fighting corruption: the traditional method, where chiefs are the justices; the law court system, naming and shaming by investigative journalists, etc. And now we talking about the office of the special prosecutor and the RTI bill. But, referring to the recent hue and cry raised by the special prosecutor about the unwillingness of some government officials to make available, documents needed to aid in prosecution coupled with the decades of hibernation of the RTI bill in parliament as some evidence, tens of thousands, running into millions, of Ghanaians are now seeing some particles of truth in the words of the cynics, which verbalize that the motive for the setting up of the office of the special prosecutor and the RTI bill were defeated the very day they were conceived. Alas, reports show that the canker keeps touching and winning more souls, and its effects keep multiplying. Should we sit unconcerned while corruption nibbles us to death?  
But is there any panacea at all for corruption?
Education is not just an equalizer; education is the perfect cure for corruption.  It is the tool that was used in building the Singaporean army. The father of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yu, observed earlier that economic and social progress, and military might are not the natural order of things. But depend on relentless effort on the part of government and citizens. He understood that to build an army, he needed to re-orientate his people’s minds (minds that detested military due to certain precedence) through education and get them to like soldiering. 
This worked perfectly for Singapore, a former dejected British colony that transmogrified from third world into a modern metropolis. And since we believe in the Singaporean story, we can tell the story in our own way with our own words under our own circumstances. Do you know that no Ghanaian president nor finance minister ever was or is incompetent? But corruption makes them appear so. Let’s get it right, education is not just about learning mathematics and management. Facts and non-facts. Education is about learning values, and learning to hold on to characters that will allow economic principles and economic modules to function.
As we find ourselves at the crossroads in our journey of fighting corruption — after having tried diverse abortive methods — we can only adapt education as the tool to curtail the canker. This is not to suggest that the preceding methods should be shunned, no. It should complement solemn education. It is allowed not to have a particular knowledge on a particular issue at a particular point in time. But the time is now for us to realize that no amount of fine laws can unleash us from the grips of corruption until we fine-tune our minds. Yes, laws do we work properly in other places, but it works because the people have been conscientized. I cannot discharge justice justly if I share the same defects with the culprits. 
To defeat corruption, the Ministry of education must come up with a curriculum that will capture corruption as a subject — which will span the causes of corruption, catalogue of corrupt practices, and consequences of corruption, etc. — and teach it at basic, secondary and at the University level. This is the most compelling and realistic way we can effectively and efficiently retire corruption or reduce it to the barest minimum. This alongside sincere and effective multimedia public campaign could be a useful tool for fighting the threat. Because it is very common that people routinely engaged in corrupt practices without knowing. Much like extinguishing fire, fighting corruption should be done bottom up.
 Prevention is better than cure is a terrible cliché, I agree. But I tell you what, prevention is better than cure. Thus, instead of waiting to prosecute fully-fledged criminals after they’ve injured the country, it is more logical if people are re-moulded to perceive and accept corruption as their greatest enemy — and the truth is, it is our greatest enemy — at their early ages of life. This way, we can create a new generation of non-fictitious honorable men and women who will take Ghana to greatness. 
This might sound a little bit theoretical, but in my journey, I have learnt that it is a theory that matures into a law. Hence there is prospect in this proposed path. Remember, it is the attitude of man not the aptitude that determines his altitude.
Allow me, therefore, to end with the words of the Argentine revolutionary, Ernesto Che Guevara: ‘‘Seguimos en combate hasta la Victoria siempre.’’
Rahim Newton
abdulrahimnewton@yahoo.com"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"121"	2018-11-04	"In part five of my series focusing on the ideal envisaged by our forebears and framers of our Constitution, I refer to article 35 clause 6 to point out the sad fact that the country’s political leaders and holders of public office need serious rethink of the place and role of citizens in government.
I draw the attention of citizens to the need to assert their rights as provided therein that article, are real kingmakers from whom these leaders derive power.
Citizens, Civil Society and the Media, unfortunately, have for over a decade been begging these leaders to pass the Right to Information Bill into law. This is a really sad commentary as the political class is obviously disinterested despite the RTI being a constitutional imperative.
Article 35(1) ideal is that: “Ghana shall be a democratic state dedicated to the realization of freedom and justice; and accordingly, sovereignty resides in the people of Ghana from whom Government derives all its powers and authority through this Constitution.”
I have lost count how many times I have written and advocated for the passage of the RTI Bill into Law. I am angry at the disrespect and disdain shown citizens on this Bill. I am angry at the sheer waste they have inflicted on taxpayers as a result of their inertia, fear and parochial self-serving interests not to pass the RTI Bill into law.
Let me simplify the story, Ghana has spent some two decades on a law (an Act) for citizens to demand information about how their taxes are used and about how the people they put in public office/government operate ON THEIR BEHALF. The basis of this law is article 21 of the Constitution. This law is necessary because constitutions deal with the broad strokes of a subject but it is Acts that supply the detail mechanics of asserting a right among others.
This law will enable citizens demand information and officers of the State will have to supply the information demanded under compulsion of law. What this means is that, generally, the situation where such requests for information are subject to an officer’s discretion or whim will be done away with. The other implication is that, citizens generally won’t have to spend money to go to court to compel supply of information not exempt from disclosure.
The IEA led a draft bill in 1996. Government did its draft bill in 2002 and this was reviewed in 2003, then reviewed again in 2005 and then reviewed again in 2007. It was eventually laid in Parliament in 2010. The 5th Parliament held nationwide consultations on it but never passed it.
The process had to start afresh and the 6th Parliament never passed it despite further and most extensive review and debates. This 7th Parliament received yet another fresh (further reviewed) bill after intense crusade for the President to honour campaign promises cum a recent public promise to pass it.
Now the Majority Leader says they are being rushed into passing it and that they won’t take that. Another majority MP, K.T. Hammond, says passing it will grind government business to a halt and leave the presidency without secrets. Well, that’s fat lie as most information at the presidency is generally exempt. Guess what? All information generated in public office is generated with taxpayers money by people paid, housed, fed and transported by the taxpayer yet these citizens should not be entitled to same as of right?
May we, on the basis of the knowledge of the ideal envisaged by our forebears and framers of the Constitution, resist this new oppressor, mostly self-serving men pretending to represent our interests in the august house of parliament. Cut the years of excuses! Pass the RTI Law now!"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"122"	2018-11-03	"Member of Parliament for the people of Banda Constituency in the Brong Ahafo Region, Hon. Ahmed Ibrahim has thrown a challenge to Akufo Addo government to walk the talk by not introducing other bills in Parliament to pave way for the passage of the Right To Information (RTI) Bill into law.
According to the NDC MP, it is impossible to fight corruption as President Akufo Addo claims to be doing without the passage of the RTI Bill into law.
Speaking on Okay FM’s \"Ade Akye Abia\" Morning Show, Hon. Ahmed Ibrahim urged the government to consider the RTI Bill as its number one priority and focus on the passage of the bill into law by not bringing further bills for consideration until the RTI bill is passed.
He reiterated that it is welcoming to see NGOs and other media practitioners coming on board to pressurise the government into doing the needful.
“Media Coalition on RTI has started mounting pressure and showing concerns but I think that this is the kind of pressure we need. People thought it is the work of only the NDC to mount pressure on the government; the work is not for only the NDC. We are only a Minority in Parliament and all those who are not in government are part of the minority”, he averred.
“So the kind of pressure NGOs and citizens are mounting to see the passage of the RTI bill is welcoming news and that will make the government realise that RTI bill is a priority because the bill, whenever we decide to work on it, the government introduces new bill as its priority and then pushes aside the RTI bill,\" he noted.
Hon. Ibrahim explained that the RTI law is the key to every public department to demand for information on their activities as it is the taxpayer’s money which is being used to run the operations of the public service. 
“For instance, we need to know how state money is being used, how loans are acquired and the cost of infrastructural development and the kind of people involved in the contract? So if the work is not done well, you can confront the contractors and the government agency”, he explained.
He stressed that without the RTI law, Ghanaians tend to think any infrastructural development by a government is an act of favour, denying them the right to ask how the state resources were used as it is their tax being used to implement the projects.
“Without information, the work can be done anyhow but if the RTI law is in place, it is an access key to unlock every place of government to give proper probity and accountability. If the RTI bill is passed, every Ghanaian will have the right to ask for any information in the country...the work of investigative journalists will be easy and their lives will not be in danger”, he asserted.
“That is why we are saying that if the government is determined to fight corruption, it should stop all other bills until the RTI bill is passed into law, then we will know he [Nana Addo] is committed to fighting corruption. He must walk the talk”, he demanded."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"123"	2018-11-02	" The Eastern Regional Coordinator of the Right to Information(RTI) Coalition, Mr Edmund Quaynor had called on the Members of Parliament to demonstrate their desire to contribute towards the reduction of poverty in the country and respect for the electorates of Ghana by passing the RTI bill into law.
 He explained that the skewing of all the arguments on RTI to political benefits of the law had blinded people on the  contribution of the RTI law to the economic emancipation of the ordinary people and contribution of the law to poverty alleviation.
 Mr Quaynor was speaking at a public forum on the RTI Bill at Asamankese. The forum was organized by the Eastern Regional Branch of the RTI Coalition with the support from the African Office of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative and the Open Society Foundation, an international funding institution.
 The RTI law, when passed would allow Ghanaians to be asking questions on policies and issues. Mr Quaynor explained that access to quality information is the first step to the creation of successful businesses because with information, “it is easy for entrepreneurs to take the right decision to succeed.” He said this is what access to information could do for the individual and the country as a whole.
 Ms Esther Ahulu of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative said Ghana needed an RTI law that is workable and beneficial to the people. She called for the removal of those clauses of the bill that gives a blanket exemption to the information from the Presidency and information from the public service."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"124"	2018-11-02	"The Eastern Regional Programs Officer of the National Commission on Civic Education (NCCE) George Konlan has chastised Members of Parliament for delaying the passage of the Right to Information bill.
According to him, their actions deepens suspicions of them being corrupt.
Speaking to Starr news on the sidelines of a roundtable discussions on “the Youth in the Fight Against Corruption in Ghana” held in Koforidua by the National Youth Authority to mark African Youth Day under the theme “Raising Youth Voices against Corruption”, George Konlan said RTI is the panacea reducing corruption to the minimum level hence must be passed at all cost.
“….That is one of the reasons why it has not yet been passed because the political office holders think that it might pose a threat to them that they may have to disclose documents they may not like to disclose. Very recently, I heard our parliamentarians say it is likely that they can’t pass it before parliament rises; why they are reluctant to pass it, they alone know. We can only speculate but they alone know. They do not know that they are confirming suspicions that they are not absorbed from practices that will expose them to public ridicule.”
According to him, “the Right to Information Bill will help to fight corruption. It will enable people to get the evidence they need to properly report corruption because we encourage people to report corruption but if you report corruption and you do not have any iota of evidence it becomes complicated because, evidence of corruption is difficult to secure and so the RTI will make it legally possible for people to go to into any institution and demand certain documents. If they refuse to give you, you can proceed to court to compel them to release the documents to you.”
The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by Ghana’s 1992 Constitution and ratified as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The RTI bill was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament.
The bill was presented to Parliament on February 5, 2010 but has since not been passed despite undergoing countless number of amendments. The delay in the passage of the bill has attracted many groups in recent times including the Media coalition on RTI to exert torrid pressure on Parliament to pass the bill before it rises.
According to George Konlan, the Eastern regional Programs Officer of NCCE, the Commission is not happy about delay in the passage of the RTI bill because it would complement the whistleblower act to expose corrupt practices.
“We are not happy at all because we want people to enjoy their freedoms and liberties, we want people to know so if you want to know you should have the opportunity to know”."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"125"	2018-11-01	"The Right to Information (RTI) Coalition has harshly criticized the governing New Patriotic Party Member of Parliament for Adansi Asokwa over his recent comments about the bill that is before parliament.
K.T. Hammond told Starr News’ Parliamentary correspondent Ibrahim Alhassan that passage of the bill into law will lead to anarchy.
Citing former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair, who he says admitted regret over the passage of a freedom to information law in the UK, the Adansi Asokwa lawmaker said: “It is a recipe for disaster. It is a recipe for bad governance.
He added: “Ministers can’t operate, governments cannot proceed effectively, and governance cannot take place meaningfully.”
Speaking to Starr Midday News’ Regina Borley Bortey, Thursday the Chairman of the RTI Coalition Seth Abloso slammed the lawmaker’s comments as reckless.
“This comment of his make him an apology of a Member of Parliament because he is completely either ignorant or being mischievous. Now, I will advise him to get to read, not only read but study the memorandum that accompanied the bill to parliament.
“That’ll let him appreciate if he doesn’t know at this point the rationale behind an RTI bill and the need for an RTI law for this democracy,” said Mr Abloso.
Contrary to the lawmaker’s comment, Mr Abloso explained that right to information is a constitutional requirement and that it was foolhardy for anyone to suggest that it will make the country ungovernable.
“It promotes confidence in government because it promotes openness. Unless somebody is in government who has something to hide, that person will be uncomfortable with an RTI Law and I think it is good that this time around KT Hammond was not deserving of a ministerial appointment,” he stated.
The RTI bill which was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year was drafted some two decades earlier under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA ) and it has been 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"126"	2018-11-01	" Member of Parliament for Adansi Asokwa, K.T Hammond has said passing the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law will be a “disaster” and a recipe for “bad governance” in the country.
 According to the MP, the bill will make governance problematic for the country and will not inure to the nation’s best interest when it is passed into law.
 His comment follows a renewed pressure from media practitioners and civil society groups for the legislature to pass the age old bill which is seen as a key tool to combating corruption.
 “[The RTI] is a recipe for disaster, it’s a recipe for bad governance. Tony Blair went on to tell the whole world how stupid he was for bringing the RTI bill, knowing how belatedly the implications was. He said they were wrong, it was one useless piece of legislation that he passed and he is very upset about it and we learn from history. We sit down here and we don’t want to learn from history, so fine let's go ahead,” Mr Hammond told journalists.
 The RTI Bill is expected to increase the access of citizens to public information.
 It has however been in and out of Parliament for about 18 years without passage."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"127"	2018-11-01	" The Media Coalition on RTI has issued a stern caution to Members of Parliament who take pride in absenting themselves from the House.
 The coalition stress that beginning today November 1, 2018, names of absentee MPs during the sitting especially when it is time for the consideration of the RTI Bill will be published on various media platforms.
 This action comes on the back of Parliament’s decision to abruptly end the deliberations of the RTI Bill in parliament after Adansi Asokwa MP Kobina Tahir Hammond pointed out that the House was not properly constituted to consider the Bill.
 Parliament’s Standing Order 48(2) requires that more than one-third of its members must be present for a quorum to be formed to enable the House to attend to issues.
 The coalition asserts that it is deeply taken aback by the action of parliament despite acknowledging the appropriateness of the applied standing orders.
 “Beginning tomorrow 1st November, 2018, the Coalition, with support from Parliamentary Network Africa (PNAfrica) and the Parliamentary Press Corp, will put in place measures to take note of the names of all MPs present in Chamber whenever the RTI Bill is called for Consideration, and will publish the names of all MPs who are absent for the information of their constituents. This we believe will ensure that a quorum is present at all time in Parliament for a good work to be done on the Bill” the coalition stated in a press release issued Wednesday.
 It observed that the trend of actions taken by K. T. Hammond any time the Bill was up for consideration and emphasised “We are minded by the fact that Mr. K. T. Hammond, has since the year 2016 adopted this path of raising quorum issues whenever the RTI Bill is under consideration. It has become necessary that our elected representatives are in the Chamber at all times to do the work they are paid to do.”
 Together with other stakeholders, the Media Coalition on RTI Bill has expressed their commitment to strictly monitor the process in hope that government keeps its word to pass the Bill before the 15th of November, 2018 when the budget will be read.
 Find below the full details of the press statementPRESS RELEASECONSIDERATION OF RTI BILL ENDS ABRUPTLY IN PARLIAMENT FOR LACK OF QUORUM
 The Media Coalition on RTI observed with great joy the resumption of work on the RTI Bill this afternoon in accordance with the pledge by Parliament yesterday to “start in earnest with the Consideration Stage of the Right to Information Bill, 2018, with the aim of completing its consideration before the introduction of the Budget Statement…” We are happy that our efforts in the last two days and earlier efforts by other well-meaning Ghanaians and organisations are yielding results.
 As we congratulate Parliament for listening to the voice of the people, we are taken aback by the abrupt end of the process after about one hour of working on it due to a motion on the lack of quorum in the House raised by the Hon. MP for Adansi Asokwa, Mr. Kobina Tahir Hammond.
 Parliament’s Standing Order 48(2) requires that “If at the time of Sitting a Member takes notice or objection that there are present in the House, besides the person presiding, less than one-third of the number of all the Members of Parliament, and after an interval of ten minutes a quorum is not present, the person presiding shall adjourn the House without Question put until the next sitting day.”
 We, therefore, understood why the Speaker had no choice but to bring the subject to a close, although other concerns such as the tight schedule of the Committee responsible for the Bill were also raised.
 We are minded by the fact that Mr. K. T. Hammond, has since the year 2016 adopted this path of raising quorum issues whenever the RTI Bill is under consideration. It has become necessary that our elected representatives are in the Chamber at all times to do the work they are paid to do.
 Beginning tomorrow 1st November, 2018, the Coalition, with support from Parliamentary Network Africa (PNAfrica) and the Parliamentary Press Corp, will put in place measures to take note of the names of all MPs present in Chamber whenever the RTI Bill is called for Consideration, and will publish the names of all MPs who are absent for the information of their constituents.
 This we believe will ensure that a quorum is present at all time in Parliament for a good work to be done on the Bill.
 We call on the leadership of both sides of the House, especially the Whips, to ensure that their Members avail themselves for the task entrusted to them.
 Having taken note of the indicative date for the Budget reading (15th November 2018), we will gladly countdown the days from now until then to see if Parliament will live up to its pledge of passing the Bill before the Budget reading.
 We call on all Civil Society Organisations and other stakeholders who have been supporting parliament in this process, including all media practitioners, to continue to support the august House to deliver excellence for the good people of Ghana.
 Issued in Accra for Immediate Release
 Steering Committee, Media Coalition on RTI"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"128"	2018-11-01	"The Media Coalition on RTI has issued a stern caution to Members of Parliament who take pride in absenting themselves from the House.
The coalition stress that beginning today November 1, 2018, names of absentee MPs during the sitting especially when it is time for the consideration of the RTI Bill will be published on various media platforms.
This action comes on the back of Parliament’s decision to abruptly end the deliberations of the RTI Bill in parliament after Adansi Asokwa MP Kobina Tahir Hammond pointed out that the House was not properly constituted to consider the Bill.
Parliament’s Standing Order 48(2) requires that more than one-third of its members must be present for a quorum to be formed to enable the House to attend to issues.
The coalition asserts that it is deeply taken aback by the action of parliament despite acknowledging the appropriateness of the applied standing orders.
“Beginning tomorrow 1st November, 2018, the Coalition, with support from Parliamentary Network Africa (PNAfrica) and the Parliamentary Press Corp, will put in place measures to take note of the names of all MPs present in Chamber whenever the RTI Bill is called for Consideration, and will publish the names of all MPs who are absent for the information of their constituents. This we believe will ensure that a quorum is present at all time in Parliament for a good work to be done on the Bill” the coalition stated in a press release issued Wednesday.
It observed that the trend of actions taken by K. T. Hammond any time the Bill was up for consideration and emphasised “We are minded by the fact that Mr. K. T. Hammond, has since the year 2016 adopted this path of raising quorum issues whenever the RTI Bill is under consideration. It has become necessary that our elected representatives are in the Chamber at all times to do the work they are paid to do.”
Together with other stakeholders, the Media Coalition on RTI Bill has expressed their commitment to strictly monitor the process in hope that government keeps its word to pass the Bill before the 15th of November, 2018 when the budget will be read.Find below the full details of the press statement
PRESS RELEASE
CONSIDERATION OF RTI BILL ENDS ABRUPTLY IN PARLIAMENT FOR LACK OF QUORUM
The Media Coalition on RTI observed with great joy the resumption of work on the RTI Bill this afternoon in accordance with the pledge by Parliament yesterday to “start in earnest with the Consideration Stage of the Right to Information Bill, 2018, with the aim of completing its consideration before the introduction of the Budget Statement…” We are happy that our efforts in the last two days and earlier efforts by other well-meaning Ghanaians and organisations are yielding results.
As we congratulate Parliament for listening to the voice of the people, we are taken aback by the abrupt end of the process after about one hour of working on it due to a motion on the lack of quorum in the House raised by the Hon. MP for Adansi Asokwa, Mr. Kobina Tahir Hammond. Parliament’s Standing Order 48(2) requires that “If at the time of Sitting a Member takes notice or objection that there are present in the House, besides the person presiding, less than one-third of the number of all the Members of Parliament, and after an interval of ten minutes a quorum is not present, the person presiding shall adjourn the House without Question put until the next sitting day.” We, therefore, understood why the Speaker had no choice but to bring the subject to a close, although other concerns such as the tight schedule of the Committee responsible for the Bill were also raised.
We are minded by the fact that Mr. K. T. Hammond, has since the year 2016 adopted this path of raising quorum issues whenever the RTI Bill is under consideration. It has become necessary that our elected representatives are in the Chamber at all times to do the work they are paid to do.
Beginning tomorrow 1st November, 2018, the Coalition, with support from Parliamentary Network Africa (PNAfrica) and the Parliamentary Press Corp, will put in place measures to take note of the names of all MPs present in Chamber whenever the RTI Bill is called for Consideration, and will publish the names of all MPs who are absent for the information of their constituents. This we believe will ensure that a quorum is present at all time in Parliament for a good work to be done on the Bill
We call on the leadership of both sides of the House, especially the Whips, to ensure that their Members avail themselves for the task entrusted to them.
Having taken note of the indicative date for the Budget reading (15th November 2018), we will gladly countdown the days from now until then to see if Parliament will live up to its pledge of passing the Bill before the Budget reading. We call on all Civil Society Organisations and other stakeholders who have been supporting parliament in this process, including all media practitioners, to continue to support the august House to deliver excellence for the good people of Ghana.
Issued in Accra for Immediate Release
Steering Committee, Media Coalition on RTI"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"129"	2018-10-31	" The Member of Parliament for Asokwa, KT Hammond, on Wednesday mounted a strong opposition to the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law.
 According to him, the bill when passed will render the country ungovernable.
 “It is a recipe for disaster. It is a recipe for bad governance,” he told Starr News’ Parliamentary Correspondent Ibrahim Alhassan.
 “Ministers can’t operate, governments cannot proceed effectively, governance cannot take place meaningfully,” he added.
 Mr Hammond’s comments come a day after fellow legislature from Ningo Prampram Sam George described as a misplaced priority the demands of the Media Coalition on Right to Information for the bill to be passed into law.
 According to Mr George, who is also a member of the Communications Committee of Parliament the passage of the bill into law will be of no consequence at all.
 The Coalition was on Tuesday barred from entering the lawmaking chamber by police guards to press home their demand for the passage of the bill into law.
 “I have been one of the loudest to say that the RTI is of no consequence. I think the media fraternity, you have completely…completely misplaced your priorities,” the former Presidential Staffer told Alhassan Tuesday.
 He continued: “You are chasing an RTI bill, an RTI bill that will not fix any problem. Today, what will an RTI do? If we pass the RTI bill and it comes into law, all it means is that there is a designated officer in an institution who we have termed in the bill, an information officer.
 “So, you send a request to an information officer, he has seven days to respond to your request. If you do the request and the information officer tells you I don’t have the information, what can you do?”The RTI
 The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year.
 It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
 The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.Collusion against RTI bill
 The Centre for Democratic Development (CDD) earlier this month accused the governing New Patriotic Party and the opposition National Democratic Congress (NDC) of colluding against the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
 The Centre for Democratic Development (CDD) earlier this month accused the governing New Patriotic Party and the opposition National Democratic Congress (NDC) of colluding against the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
 “…If there’s one, or two or three things that the two main political parties [NPP and NDC] align, agree to, then, it is this RTI that they don’t want. I think that’s what it is,” the Deputy Director of the CDD Dr Franklin Oduro who is also the CDD’s Head of Research and Program said at a roundtable discussion on METOGU anti-corruption report in Accra.
 “My own view is that these two parties have demonstrated that they don’t want the RTI. So there’s no blame game between them, the NDC and the NPP,” he added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"130"	2018-10-31	"Stories making headlines on the front pages in the major newspapers include:The Finder
*Siemens to establish presence in Ghana soon - President
*Upgraded new Metro TV hits the road again
*Fresh push for RTI Bill
*FIFA bans Nyantekyi for life and imposes $500,000 fine
*Tema residents live in fear over multiple robbery attackThe independent 
*Delta Force, Invisible forces terrorists, not vigilante groups - Opare Addo 
*Setback at Parliament House as campaign to get RTI Bill passed, almost  thwartedThe Ghanaian Observer
*Mahama's Security attacks journalist, \"I went blank and fell\" - Teary JoyFM reporter narrates ordeal 
*Siemens to establish presence in Ghana soon - Akufo-Addo
*Asamoah Gyan grabs new 'wife'
*FIFA bans Nyantakyi for life!Daily Guide
*GBA wades into KNUST saga
*Asamoah Gyan files for divorce
*Mahama bodyguards on rampage: Beat up journalist 
*Germany's Siemens comingGoldstreet Business
*Aviation sector attracts US investor interest
*Businesses worried over impending revocation of banking licenses
*World Banks US$35 million boosts land digitization process"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"131"	2018-10-30	" A group of journalists rallying support to get the Right to Information bill passed were Tuesday prevented from entering into Parliament house.
 The Media Coalition on RTI had planned to storm the public gallery of Parliament to put pressure on the legislators to ratify the bill, which was on their Order Paper.
 But the police in charge of security there were given “strict order” to march them out because they were wearing branded T-shirts, a leading member of the group Elvis Darko told Efua Tieku on TV3 Midday Live.
 “We are not going to shout or do anything,” he lamented, saying their aim was to “sit down quietly and listen to” parliamentary proceedings.
 According to him, even known parliamentary staff wearing the t-shirts were not allowed to enter, but journalists who were not wearing the shirts gained access to the foyer and public gallery.
 The T-Shirt has the group’s name on a red background with pictures of journalistic tools like book and pen, microphone and camera. Also inscribed on the shirt are #PassTheRTIBillNow and #PASSITNOW.
 Elvis Darko felt it was “unreasonable” for parliament to drive them away when they don’t pose any threat to legislators, wondering why the MPs were “jittery and afraid” of their presence.
 The RTI bill has been in and out of parliament for over 10 years with successive governments shying away from its passage.
 The Member of Parliament for Tamale North, Alhaji Alhassan Suhuyini had earlier told TV3 the group should direct its concern to government to prioritise the bill if it wants the bill passed.
 But Mr. Darko assesses the position of the legislator as a “confession” because the MP’s own government spent eight years in power without passing it.
 “Governments are deliberately refusing to pass the bill,” he concluded.
 Accusing the MP of being part of the problem, he said the bill is in Parliament so interested MPs can push it.
 Nonetheless, he said the group will use all legitimate means available to it to get the RTI bill passed."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"132"	2018-10-30	" Ghanaian journalists and media practitioners have come together to form a coalition to push for the passage of the long Right to Information (RTI) Bill which they say has been long overdue.
 At the launch of the coalition, known as the Media Coalition on RTI, in Accra Monday, the member said they were determined to embark on a series of action, including demonstrations, to force the passage of the bill into law.
 For a start, members of the coalition will on Tuesday storm the public gallery of Parliament House in T-Shirts with messages demanding action on the passage of RTI.
 The formation of the coalition follows the foot-dragging tactics of the two previous parliaments in passing the RTI Bill.
 Addressing the media at the launch, Elvis Darko, who is a member of the Interim Steering Committee of the Coalition, said “the Right to Information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the constitution.”
 He stated that for a constitutional democracy like Ghana’s to thrive, it is important that the citizens are informed. “It is only when those who are to participate in governance are well informed that they can contribute meaningfully,” he said.
 He described the RTI as the most abused piece of legislation in the 4th Republic.
 “For about two decades, successive governments have failed to ensure the passage of the Right to Information law that will give meaning to this constitutional provision. To describe a draft legislation that has been laid five times in Parliament since the 2010 as a result of withdrawals or expiration of the tenure, as the most abused piece of draft legislation in the history of the 4th Republican Parliament will not be far from right,” he said.
 The birth of the media coalition is as a result of several interventions by Civil Society Organisations to ensure the passage of the RTI Bill.
 The Coalition has successfully mobilized over 120 journalists across the country who have committed to use their respective platforms to heighten awareness on the Bill.
 The Coalition expressed its frustration at the at the attitude of parliament, which, it says, goes counter to its duty to represent the interests of the electorate who voted them into the august House, as far as the passage of the RTI Bill goes, by “representing themselves, their party interests and throwing the the national interest to the dogs.
 “Parliament has exhibited clear acts of dishonesty and disrespect to the people they represent, as they have in these instances hidden behind their Standing Orders to dribble the people of Ghana,” he finished to rapturous applause.
 Darko, went on to enumerate the Coalition’s plan of action to force parliament’s hand in the matter of the passage of the long delayed bill.
 He said that the Coalition would first write to the leadership of parliament to press home the message of its press conference.
 It would also circulate the message contained in the press statement through the WhatsApp numbers of all MPs as a means of serving them due notice.
 He also revealed that it would work closely with the Parliamentary Press Corps to ensure that the MPs are aware of the seriousness of their call.
 As part of this pressure, the members of the Coalition would be in the public gallery this morning, clad in their T-shirts to press home their demands, while looking out for a hint of the RTI.
 The statement went on to caution that the Coalition would not hesitate to picket in Parliament House, and may go as far as to boycott coverage of Plenary and Committee Sittings should no of action be taken towards the passage of the RTI Bill.
 They also pledged to make the issue of the passage of RTI Bill a regular topic of conversation on the various platforms; engaging regularly with managers and Editors of various national, regional media, including community radio stations, to ensure that the wider population understand the benefits of the RTI regime.
 Besides this, it would work with Ghanaian media personnel, home and abroad, to display RTI Passage placards at all functions attended by the Speaker of Parliament, the Majority and Minority Leaders, and the President.
 The coalition also promised to track all promises made by public officials on the RTI Bill, and would go as far as naming and shaming them for reneging on their promises.
 They also served notice that their lenses would be fixed on MPs who through their actions and inactions oppose the swift passage of a credible RTI law. They also, as part of their strategy, will resort strongly to social media, through the hashtag#PassItNowas it is a fact that the top trends on social media in Ghana are mainly campaigns promoted by media houses.
 The statement also gave tacit support to the hashtag being employed by civil society #PassTheRTIBillNow.
 It threatened to publish the contact information of all MPs on media platforms to get the public calling, emailing and mentioning their MPs on social media to “pass the RTI Bill now.”
 Finally, the statement warned against the creation of the impression that the passage of the RTI Bill will promote irresponsible journalism as this is simply an act of unfair generalization.
 “Ghana has a good number of responsible journalists who have been the reasons for getting the news to the general public constantly and timely, and exposing rot by public officials and private persons despite very terrible conditions of service for journalists … and the great dangers we encounter in doing our work,” the statement added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"133"	2018-10-30	" The Member of Parliament for Ningo Prampram, Sam George, has described as misplaced priority demands by the Media Coalition on the Right to Information bill for the immediate passage of the bill into law.
 Mr George who is also a member of the Communications Committee of Parliament further noted that the passage of the bill into law will be of no consequence at all.
 “I have been one of the loudest to say that the RTI is of no consequence. I think the media fraternity, you have completely…completely misplaced your priorities,” the former Presidential Staffer told Starr News’ Parliamentary correspondent Ibrahim Alhassan Tuesday.
 He continued: “You are chasing an RTI bill, an RTI bill that will not fix any problem. Today, what will an RTI do? If we pass the RTI bill and it comes into law, all it means is that there is a designated officer in an institution who we have termed in the bill, an information officer.
 “So, you send a request to an information officer, he has seven days to respond to your request. If you do the request and the information officer tells you I don’t have the information, what can you do?”
 His comments follow the blocking of the members of the coalition by police in Parliament from entering the lawmaking chamber to protest the delay in the passage of the bill into law.
 Clad in RTI t-shirts, the journalists were confronted by police officers manning the lawmaking chamber who demanded that they provide evidence of their permit to allow them on the premises.
 “One of our colleagues the police accosted him. I was there and we had a confrontation and they say we should go to their police post here to sort out the issue,” Elvis Darko a member of the Steering Committee of the Coalition told Starr News.
 The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year.
 It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
 The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 The Centre for Democratic Development (CDD) earlier this month accused the governing New Patriotic Party and the opposition National Democratic Congress (NDC) of colluding against the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
 “…If there’s one, or two or three things that the two main political parties [NPP and NDC] align, agree to, then, it is this RTI that they don’t want. I think that’s what it is,” the Deputy Director of the CDD Dr Franklin Oduro who is also the CDD’s Head of Research and Program said at a roundtable discussion on METOGU anti-corruption report in Accra.
 “My own view is that these two parties have demonstrated that they don’t want the RTI. So there’s no blame game between them, the NDC and the NPP,” he added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"134"	2018-10-29	"The Media Coalition on the Right to Information Bill has threatened to boycott coverage of parliamentary sittings, should parliament continue to deny the bill the necessary attention which will lead to its subsequent passage. 
The RTI Bill which has been laid five times before parliament since 2010 due to withdrawals and expiration has become the most talked about piece of drafted legislation in current times.
Although some Civil Society Organizations have demanded for its immediate passage, with President Akufo-Addo backing the call, the passage of the bill continuous to be met with some resistance. 
Outlining some measures to be taken by the coalition should Parliament’s Business Committee neglect to lay the RTI Bill before the house tomorrow, member of the coalition, Elvis Darko said the group will also not hesitate to work with media personnel both home and abroad to display RTI Passage placards at all local and international functions attended by the Speaker of Parliament, Majority Leader, Minority Leader and President of the Republic.
“In tomorrow’s first sitting, we will be curious to find out how much consideration Parliament’s Business Committee Proposes to be given to the RTI Bill in this week’s business statement and for the rest of the meeting. We know the committee will be meeting early tomorrow morning as the order of the house requires and hence we call on Mr. Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu and Mr. Haruna Iddrisu to ensure that their committee does the needful. 
He added that they are also going to track all promises made by public officials on the RTI Bill, name and shame them for non-compliance to those promises.\"
He further stated that, should these actions be ignored by parliament, constant picketing will be held in parliament by members of the coalition. 
“We also plan to write to all the leadership of parliament to reiterate our message and we will see to it that our letters are delivered personally. We will then circulate our press statement to the Whatsapp numbers of all the MPs as our way of serving them notice. 
After this, we will not hesitate to picket in Parliament House regularly and in some instance boycott the coverage of plenary and committee sitting should we see no clear actions of parliament towards the passage of the law.” BACKGROUND
The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The bill as it has been drafted is to give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.” 
The bill was subsequently drafted in 1999 under the former president, Jerry John Rawlings. Various advocacy groups emerged to press for the immediate passing of the bill into law in 2002. 
In 2003, 2005 and 2007, the draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010 when it was later withdrawn for some clauses to be reviewed. Since then, efforts by several advocacy groups to put pressure on the duty bearers to have the Bill passed have also not yielded any positive results until now."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"135"	2018-10-29	"Members of Ghana’s media fraternity have come together to form a coalition to push for the passage of the long overdue Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
Known as the Media Coalition on RTI, it was officially, outdoored in Accra yesterday and is open to media practitioners in Ghana.
The media practitioners say they are determined to embark on a series of action, including demonstrations, to force the passage of the bill into law.
Today, members of the coalition will flood the public gallery of Parliament House in T-Shirts with message demanding action on the passage of RTI.
The launch was attended by journalists from all corners of the country, bringing to light the seriousness which the media is attaching to the issue of the passage of the Bill this time round. 
This follows the foot-dragging tactics which the two previous parliaments have employed when it came to the issue of the passage of the RTI Bill.
Addressing the media at the Accra International Press Centre, Elvis Darko, who is a member of the Interim Steering Committee of the Coalition, said “the Right to Information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the constitution.” 
He further stated that for a constitutional democracy like Ghana’s to thrive, it is important that the citizens are informed.“It is only when those who are to participate in governance are well informed that they can contribute meaningfully,” he said.
On the reluctance of previous parliaments to pass the RTI Bill, he described the RTI as the most abused piece of legislation in the 4th Republic. 
“For about two decades, successive governments have failed to ensure the passage of the Right to Information law that will give meaning to this constitutional provision. To describe a draft legislation that has been laid five times in |Parliament since the 2010 as a result of withdrawals or expiration of the tenure, as the most abused piece of draft legislation in the history of the 4th Republican Parliament will not be far from right.” 
The birth of the media coalition is as a result of several interventions by Civil Society Organisationsto ensure the passage of the RTI Bill. The Coalition has successfully mobilized over 120 journalists across the country who have committed to use their respective platforms to heighten awareness on the Bill.
The Coalition expressed its frustration at the at the attitude of parliament, which, it says, goes counter to its duty to represent the interests of the electorate who voted them into the august House, as far as the passage of the RTI Bill goes, by “representing themselves, their party interests and throwing the the national interest to the dogs.
“Parliament has exhibited clear acts of dishonesty and disrespect to the people they represent, as they have in these instances hidden behind their Standing Orders to dribble the people of Ghana,” he finished to rapturous applause.
Darko, went on to enumerate the Coalition’s plan of action to force parliament’s hand in the matter of the passage of the long delayed bill.
He said that the Coalition would first write to the leadership of parliament to press home the message of its press conference. 
It would also circulate the message contained in the press statement through the WhatsApp numbers of all MPs as a means of serving them due notice.
He also revealed that it would work closely with the Parliamentary Press Corps to ensure that the MPs are aware of the seriousness of their call. 
As part of this pressure, the members of the Coalition would be in the public gallery this morning, clad in their T-shirts to press home their demands, while looking out for a hint of the RTI.
The statement went on to caution that the Coalition would not hesitate to picket in Parliament House, and may go as far as to boycott coverage of Plenary and Committee Sittings should no of action be taken towards the passage of the RTI Bill.
They also pledged to make the issue of the passage of RTI Bill a regular topic of conversation on the various platforms; engaging regularly with managers and Editors of various national, regional media, including community radio stations, to ensure that the wider population understand the benefits of the RTI regime. 
Besides this, it would work with Ghanaian media personnel, home and abroad, to display RTI Passage placards at all functions attended by the Speaker of Parliament, the Majority and Minority Leaders, and the President.
The coalition also promised to track all promises made by public officials on the RTI Bill, and would go as far as naming and shaming them for reneging on their promises. 
They also served notice that their lenses would be fixed on MPs who through their actions and inactions oppose the swift passage of a credible RTI law.
They also, as part of their strategy, will resort strongly to social media, through the hashtag#PassItNowas it is a fact that the top trends on social media in Ghana are mainly campaigns promoted by media houses.
The statement also gave tacit support to the hashtag being employed by civil society #PassTheRTIBillNow.
Finally, it threatened to publish the contact information of all MPs on media platforms to get the public calling, emailing and mentioning their MPs on social media to “pass the RTI Bill now.”
Finally, the statement warned against the creation of the impression that the passage of the RTI Bill will promote irresponsible journalism as this is simply an act of unfair generalization. 
“Ghana has a good number of responsible journalists who have been the reasons for getting the news to the general public constantly and timely, and exposing rot by public officials and private persons despite very terrible conditions of service for journalists … and the great dangers we encounter in doing our work,” the statement added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"136"	2008-02-18	"Accra, Feb. 18, GNA - The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI), Ghana on Monday called on President John Agyekum Kufuor to make good his promise on the passage of the RTI Bill into law. \"The Coalition maintains its urgent call to President Kufuor to, without any further delay, hasten the passage of the RTI Bill into law,\" a statement signed by Nana Oye Lithur of the Coalition Secretariat said. The statement said that RTI was a constitutional right of Ghanaians as provided in Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution.
It noted that as early as 2005, President Kufuor promised in his State of the Nation Address to ensure the passage of the RTI Bill into law that year to operationalize that constitutional right. Despite government's promises, Ghana still had no legislation on RTI, the Coalition said, adding that, President Kufuor \"conspicuously excluded\" the RTI from his final State of the Nation address to Parliament last week.
\"One would expect that President Kufuor in his professed commitment to democratic, transparent and accountable governance would pass the RTI law to fulfil these aspirations but sadly, this has not been the case. \"This omission once again registers this as another failed promise by President Kufuor and the President owes it to Ghanaians to explain why he failed to provide any policy direction in his State of the Nation Address on the passage of the RTI law.\"
The statement noted that the excuse about lack of appropriate infrastructure for enforcing the RTI law could no longer justify the delay, saying that, the Coalition asserts that there are structures in place to facilitate the enforcement of the law when passed. It said in sidelining the RTI it was feared that it would reflect poorly on President Kufuor's legacy, adding that, in assessing President Kufuor's achievements, the RTI law would be a priority in the public's consideration.
The Coalition therefore urged government to pass the RTI Bill into law to deal with corruption and empower citizens to hold politicians and public officers to account."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"137"	2018-10-14	"Panelists in focus group discussions on the Right to Information (RTI) bill had called for the intensification of education on the bill to get people to demand the passage of it into law.
       The panelists observed that people are not making mass demand on the law makers to pass the bill because they have not been educated to know that the mass unemployment, poverty and denial of social services by duty bearers were the results of their denial of specific information which they require to overcome those social challenges facing them. 
      The group called on the media, civil society organizations and activists on the RTI to raise the tempo of their campaign and public education to get people to appreciate the effect of their being denied information on their personal development and the progress of the country.
    The group regretted that the passage of the RTI bill into law had been reduced to a political campaign tool by the major political parties in the country since developments after elections proved that the political parties are not serious in seeing the bill passed into law.
      The focus group discussion was organized by the Eastern Regional branch of the Right to Information Coalition at Koforidua with support from the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) office in Africa.
     Ms Mina Mensah, Head of Africa Office of CHRI in a remark explained that the current RTI bill before Parliament had seen a lot of amendments, but still had some clauses which need to be amended to ensure that the bill when passed into law becomes beneficial to the people.
    She explained that if those clauses are not amended, they would render the bill useless.
      She cited the case of clause 13 of the bill which she said in practice means almost all documents in the public service will become exempt information.
Ms Mensah called for the deletion of clause 13 from the bill and other clauses which could deny the people access to information.
          Mr Gladstone Tetteh, the Executive Director of Cencord - Odumase Krobo urged the media and the civil society organizations to make the agenda for passing the RTI bill into law visible just like they did to get the Galamsey agenda to get the political and social attention needed."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"138"	2018-10-05	"Head of Research and Programme at the Center for Democratic Development (CDD) has bemoaned the lack of commitment on the part of government and successive governments in resourcing anti-corruption institutions.
His call comes at the back of demands by the Office of the Special Prosecutor (OSP) to be resourced to fight corruption effectively.
Speaking at a roundtable discussion on METOGU (a Guan word which means ‘keeping the pressure on’) anti-corruption report, Mr Oduro said government has failed in using the OSP as a means to effectively deal with corruption.
The roundtable discussions centered on key findings from the METOGU anti-corruption report which was launched three months ago by Penplusbyte and provide an opportunity for government to respond to findings and provide additional information on its pertinent anti-corruption interventions.
Reacting to the issue of government breaking its promise of an issue raised on ensuring the elections of MMDCEs, Deputy Minister of Information, Pius Enam Hadzide, hinted that that promise has not been broken as government together with the Local Government Ministry have completed a road map to ensure that that promise is kept. 
The Penplusbytes’ METOGU study findings on anti-corruption indicates some Ghanaians hold a perception that government’s attitude in delivering on its promises to curb corruption is rather lukewarm.
Over 95 percent of the respondents in the study affirmed that corruption is high in Ghana and is highly pervasive in the public sector where a vast majority have had to pay facilitation or illegal fees to access services.
In addition, the study found out that 7 out of 10 are generally unsatisfied with government’s efforts so far at fighting corruption.
The research was aimed at providing a platform that would encourage citizens to put pressure on public officials to work hard towards a zero corruption situation in the country.
The study sought to identify the public’s understanding of general corruption issues, the impact of the creation of the OSP, the passage of the RTI Bill, reforms in the Public Procurement Act and value for money.
Also, the passage of the Public Officers’ Code of Conduct Bill, the assets declaration regime, as well as the National Health Insurance Scheme and the school feeding programme were some other themes focused on.
The essence of the research was to empower the public to push the government to fulfil its manifesto promises.
The research was, thus, based on the New Patriotic Party (NPP) manifesto, showing its achievements, failure and progress."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"139"	2018-10-04	" Government is working gradually towards fulling its campaign promise of electing municipal, metropolitan and district chief executives (MMDCEs), Mr Pius Enam Hadzide, the Deputy Minister of Information, said on Thursday.
 He said the New Patriotic Party’s promise to ensure that Ghana elected MMDCE’s was “a process and not an event” and so the citizens must rest assured that that promise would be fulfilled in due time.
 He said the Government already had a roadmap towards the election of MMDCEs, “which we are following closely”.
 Speaking at a stakeholder’s roundtable discussion in Accra on Wednesday, Mr Hadzide said electing MMDCEs demanded some amendment to the portions of the Constitution with some entrenched clauses.
 He said touching those entrenched clauses would not happen within the first 20 months of any government “but there is clear commitment on our part to ensuring that that is done”.
 Mr Hadzide said the setting up of an Elections of MMDCES Committee, review of legislations and preparations of background of the document, undertaking some media engagements to carry the people along, as well as drafting of an amendment act that would aid the process, were part of the activities being undertaken.
 The Roundtable was organised by Penplusbytes, a not-for-profit organisation, under its “Metogu” (Keep the Pressure on) programme, which involves citizens’ assessment of the issue of corruption, the various interventions of government in dealing with the canker and assessing specific sector promises it proposed to fight corruption in the run-up to the 2016 elections.
 The programme was being funded by the UK-AID under its Strengthening Action Against Corruption.
 It was to help the Government to respond to the findings in the Metogu research that solicited the views of 792 respondents in the Greater Accra, Ashanti, Western and Volta regions.
 The study revealed that 90 per cent of citizens were of the opinion that the Government was not serious about passing the Right to Information (RTI) Bill, noting that an RTI law was the foundation to bring about true transparency and accountability in promoting good governance and curbing corruption.
 Commenting on the work of the Special Prosecutor, Mr Hadzide said the Government wanted to truly make the Office more independent to investigate and prosecute corrupt officials.
 He said the Government continued to show its commitments towards the fight against corruption through the establishment of the Office, saying, the only consideration for choosing Mr Martin Amidu as the Special Prosecutor was not because the New Patriotic Party saw him as one of their own but it was because of his demonstrated commitment towards the fight against corruption.
 He said the Office of the Special Prosecutor was being deliberately and adequately resourced with human and material resources, amidst other competing programmes.
 Mr Hadzide said the Office of the Head of Civil Service was also working to ensure proper recruitment of the right personnel to the Special Prosecutor’s Office.
 He said in spite of the limitations confronting the Office, the law empowered the Special Prosecutor to do some work, in collaborating with Economic and Organised Crime Organisation and the Attorney General, which he was already doing.
 The Deputy Minister said the Government was also working towards strengthening the National Health Insurance Scheme and to pass a Legislative Instrument that would it to work effectively.
 Dr Franklin Oduro, the Deputy Executive Director, Centre for Democratic Development (CDD), expressed regret that both the NPP and the National Democratic Congress had failed Ghanaians by not passing the RTI Bill.
 He said the fight against corruption should be devoid of bi-partisanship adding; “The more we reduce the fight against corruption to bi-partisan position, the less efforts we put in fighting it”."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"140"	2018-10-04	"The Member of Parliament for North Tongu Samuel Okudzeto Ablakwa has blamed the governing New Patriotic Party (NPP) for the Mahama administration’s inability to pass the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law.
Speaking Friday on Good Morning Ghana on Metro TV, the former Deputy Education Minister disclosed that the NPP resisted the erstwhile administration’s resolve to pass the bill into law before it came into power.
“We came very…very close when in the sixth parliament we [NDC] had worked on it, finished everything but then the NPP had won the election, they were not comfortable about Parliament passing that [RTI bill] and they coming to power,” said Ablakwa.
The NPP at that time, he said, argued strenuously that as the incoming government they had their own perspectives they wanted to incorporate into the bill before it becomes law.
“So you know, they had the mandate and they had won the majority so we didn’t want to force it. We shouldn’t push it with our majority, let’s allow them to come and tweak it as they may with the commitment that it will be passed soon thereafter,” he said.
“But it is almost two years the passage has not happened. It is always on the order paper, the business statements that are read every week but you don’t see that urgency, you don’t see that dynamism that has accompanied other government priorities. I think that we must bow down our heads in shame that we could have passed this long ago.”
Ablakwa’s disclosure comes on the back of claims by the Deputy Director of the Centre for Democratic Development (CDD) Dr Franklin Oduro that the governing NPP and the opposition NDC have colluded against the passage of the RTI bill into law.
“…If there’s one, or two or three things that the two main political parties [NPP and NDC] align, agree to, then, it is this RTI that they don’t want. I think that’s what it is,” Dr Oduro who is also the CDD’s Head of Research and Program said  at a round-table discussion on METOGU anti-corruption report in Accra.
“My own view is that these two parties have demonstrated that they don’t want the RTI. So there’s no blame game between them, the NDC and the NPP.
“Until they pass that law and not passing any law but the good law, I will still stand by my position that the two main parties…especially those represented in parliament have sort of come into secret understanding that let’s not get this law passage,” he added
The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok March this year.
It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"141"	2018-10-02	" The Deputy Director of the Centre for Democratic Development (CDD) Dr Franklin Oduro has  accused the governing New Patriotic Party and the opposition National Democratic Congress (NDC) of colluding against the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
 The RTI bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March this year.
 It has been 22 years since the first RTI bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI bill.
 The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 “…If there’s one, or two or three things that the two main political parties [NPP and NDC] align, agree to, then, it is this RTI that they don’t want. I think that’s what it is,” Dr Oduro who is also the CDD’s Head of Research and Program said Wednesday at a roundtable discussion on METOGU anti-corruption report in Accra.
 He continued, “My own view is that these two parties have demonstrated that they don’t want the RTI. So there’s no blame game between them, the NDC and the NPP. “
 “Until they pass that law and not passing any law but the good law, I will still stand by my position that the two main parties…especially those represented in parliament have sort of come into secret understanding that let’s not get this law passage,” he added.
 Speaking at a press launch on March 26 as Ghana joined the rest of the world to mark the World Press Freedom Day, former Information Minister, Mustapha Hamid assured that the RTI bill will be passed into law by the end of 2018.
 “We have shown our commitment in this past year that we have come into office with a commitment to pass the Right to Information bill…the Right to Information bill is going to become law by the close of this year,” said Hamid who is now Zongo and Inner Cities Development Minister following President Akufo-Addo’s maiden reshuffle.RTI’s passage will end media speculation
 According to private legal practitioner Samson Lardy Anyenini, the passage of the RTI bill into would bring an end to the culture of media speculations in the country as public officials would be mandated by law to supply journalists and the public information requested of them.
 “Your ethics that say that you should be fair and deal with the fact will be upheld because you will get the fact. You will not be speculating. You will not be running rumours on media every morning in the name of a morning show,” he said at a Seminar organised by the Ghana Journalists Association (GJA) – Ghana Institute of Journalism (GIJ) chapter earlier this year.
 “They are bound by law to supply you the contract and every information so as a journalist, you will be dealing with facts and figures that the law compels the public officials to give to you,” he added."	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"142"	2018-09-28	"The Ghana Center for Democratic Development (CDD-Ghana) has charged parliament to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law when it resumes.
As the world marks International Day for Universal Access to Information, CDD-Ghana said the government must fulfil its promise of passing the bill into law as one of its key campaign promises.
“However, in spite of the public acknowledgement of the importance and the need for public to have access to public information, successive governments have failed to give legal backing to their promises to pass the Right to Information Bill into law, two decades on.
“CDD-Ghana charges parliament, as a matter of necessity, to pass the Right to Information Bill into law during their next sitting,” CDD-Ghana said in a statement.Below is the full statement to mark the day:
INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO INFORMATION –CDD-GHANA CALLS FOR URGENT PASSAGE OF THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL NOW
The Ghana Center for Democratic Development (CDD-Ghana) is very much concerned that, Ghana is still struggling to pass the Right to Information Bill after two decades of initiating the process, despite the acknowledgement by successive governments and citizens alike, at least in the fourth Republic, of the need for public access to information.
The theme for this year’s celebration, “Access to Information: Building Knowledge Societies, Fostering Freedom of Expression,” should remind both the executive and legislative branches of government to give meaning to Ghana’s international commitments on citizens right to information.
The theme also presents opportunity for all relevant stakeholders – political parties, civil society organizations, the media, religious bodies, the academia, among many other groups, to ensure Ghanaians are informed, sensitized and educated, and above all, have access to relevant information.
Article 21 of the 1992 Constitution makes provision for a creditable legal framework put in place to guarantee citizens’ right to information. Ghana is also a signatory to a number of international treaties, and recognizes the numerous United Nations (UN) Conventions on human rights, including the right to access to information held by public bodies (Resolution 59 of the UN General Assembly adopted in 1946).
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) further states that the fundamental right of freedom of expression encompasses the freedom “to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.” Again, the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs target 16.10) enjoins member nations to “ensure public access to information and protect fundamental freedoms in accordance with national legislation and international agreements.”
However, in spite of the public acknowledgement of the importance and the need for public to have access to public information, successive governments have failed to give legal backing to their promises to pass the Right to Information Bill into law, two decades on.
CDD-Ghana charges parliament, as a matter of necessity, to pass the Right to Information Bill into law during their next sitting.
The Center commends the media and, especially the Coalition of NGOs on the Right to Information Bill, for their consistency and commitment to ensuring that Ghana has a credible law that provides the avenue for citizens to access and use public information. The Center encourages the Coalition to be steadfast and increase their work and advocacy on the Bill until we see finality.
In celebrating the 2018 International Day of Universal Access to information, CDD-Ghana charges the government to pass the Right to Information Bill into law, and by that give meaning to one of the wishes of our beloved statesman, Mr. Kofi Annan, when he once stated “Knowledge is power, Information is liberating, Education is the premise of progress, in every society, in every family.”"	18	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0
"143"	2018-07-30	" The Right To Information (RTI) Coalition in Ghana has expressed disappointment with the current parliament over the manner it is handling the RTI Bill.
 The bill was expected to be passed before parliament went on recess on Saturday, 28 July 2018.
 Speaking with the parliamentary press corps just before the house went on recess, Majority Leader Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu said parliament may consider the passage of the bill when it reconvenes.
 “We have so many clauses to consider and yet parliament is taking an adjournment on Saturday, it will not be possible for us to complete it [Right to Information Bill].
 In a reaction, the RTI Coalition said: “The Majority Leader of parliament, Hon. Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, on Wednesday, 25 July 2018 indicated at a press briefing in parliament that the House will not be able to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill due to the fact that there are so many clauses to look at. The Coalition on the Right to Information, Ghana, wishes to express their disappointment at the slow pace at which parliament has handled the consideration stage of the bill so far, and hopes history is not repeating itself. In spite of that, we are expecting that the lengthy discussions of each clause which has resulted in only six of them being discussed means our lawmakers will, in the end, give Ghana a credible, efficient and effective Right to Information Law.
 “It will be recalled that on 23 March 2018, the RTI Bill 2018 was laid before Parliament and referred to the Joint Committee on Constitutional Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and Communications. The Committee laid its report and the second reading was done on 7 June 2018. Subsequently, on 11 July 2018, the consideration of the Bill began. Throughout this period, the Coalition engaged continuously with the Joint Committee, other Members of Parliament and the general public.
 “We agree with the Majority Leader that parliament cannot pass an ‘excellent’ law, however, we expect parliament to pass a law that is fit for purpose based on international best practices which abound, (e.g. AU Model Law on Access to Information and others), and which the Coalition has consistently engaged Parliament on and also provided and continues to provide information thereon. We believe enough work has been done on this Bill and no effort should be spared to ensure the passage of a credible law.”
 The statement added: “Inasmuch as we are optimistic that the Bill will be passed by this parliament, we have not in any way ‘forgotten that we have gone this way before’. We, therefore, hope that going into the last sitting of parliament for 2018, the processes will not follow a similar trend to what occurred in the Sixth Parliament where consideration was interrupted severally to accommodate other Bills and subsequently the Bill was not passed.
 “We expect that while our elected representatives are on recess from Saturday July 29, 2018, they will keep in mind the clauses in the RTI Bill that the Coalition has identified as problematic i.e. Clauses 3, 5, 8, 9,12,13,17,38, 85, 89 and 92.
 “Considering the back and forth, prolonged delays and unfulfilled promises from our elected leaders, when the RTI Bill is finally passed Ghanaians must be able to say that this is a law that was worth waiting over 16 years for.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"144"	2018-07-24	"The Majority Leader in Parliament, Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu has disclosed that the much talked about Right to Information Bill is not likely to be passed before the House rises on Saturday.
The Right to Information Bill, when passed will ensure enhanced transparency in the governance process. It has remained on the drawing board and all efforts to get it passed into law continue to be a mirage.
The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognised as a right under international conventions on human rights.
The bill, when passed, will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states: “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.”
Speaking at a meet the press event Wednesday, the Suame MP said Parliament may consider the passage of the bill when the House reconvenes.
“We have so many clauses to consider and yet parliament is taking an adjournment on Saturday, it will not be possible for us to complete it [Right to Information Bill].
“We will continue in the next meeting but I do know that the next meeting is also the budget meeting so we’ll see what to do but I can assure that if we’re not able to complete it in the budget meeting certainly the civil meeting, we will be able to bring it to a closure,” the majority Leader said.
The Right to Information Bill was first drafted in 1999 under the supervision of governance think-tank, Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA).
The document went through series of reviews in 2003, 2005 and 2007 before finding a temporary home in Parliament on February 5, 2010."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"145"	2018-07-13	"Parliament this week commenced consideration of the RTI Bill. It is hoped that the lawmakers will give us a credible law. But will be achieved if they remove and redefine ridiculous and escape clauses. There are about twenty such including clause 13 which defeats the very purpose of the law.
CDD-Ghana and its RTI campaign partners have been pushing for action and the media ought to drive this crusade for a credible RTI law every day. Citizens seem to think media will be the biggest beneficiary of the RTI law. The media on the other hand, generally, can’t seem to be interested or feel an obligation to citizens on the crusade. Please don’t, as happened in the 2012 elections, wait to complain after the wrong has been done as law.
Read my last Take on the RTI for the full picture, but clause 13 simply provides a blanket exemption for information held by public institutions. It ultimately undermines the very essence of the law. The State which is seeking to fight the corruption of tax evasion and illicit financial flows is also in clause 12 throwing another blanket exemption as it seeks to make information relating to tax administration exempt.
There is also the general provision in clause 5 making information within the Office of the President. Hell no! Information gathered, produced and stored by all 998 staff working in that office can’t be exempt information. How many offices come under the Office of the President again?!  Please let’s rise to demand and ensure passage of a credible RTI law."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"146"	2018-06-29	"The Right to Information Bill should soon become law, hopefully. Majority Leader Osei Kyei-Mensah Bonsu had promised it will be passed two weeks after the committee working on it had presented its report to the House. We are in the third week now and I am happy it has not been passed in the current state. This is because there are genuine concerns and I had the privilege Wednesday 27th June 2018, on behalf of CDD-Ghana and its partners, the RTI Coalition and the RTI Action Group Campaign, to present some of these concerns to the leadership represented by the Minority, the Majority Leader and the 1st Deputy Speaker of Parliament. The presentation at the Crystal Ball Series in parliament is reproduced below.  Right to Information (RTI) Bill and matters arising
CDD-Ghana would like to applaud the leadership of the joint committees Legal, Constitutional and Parliamentary Affairs and Communication and the entire members of the committees for the close collaboration between the Joint Committee and the key stakeholders since the RTI Bill was referred to the Joint Committee by the Right Honourable Speaker. CDD-Ghana as a member of the Steering Committee on RTI Coalition and the RTI Action Campaign Group had the unique opportunity to contribute to the memoranda which were submitted and also the invitation from the Joint Committee to the stakeholder conference and the clause by clause review of the RTI Bill. This is a rare opportunity and again we are grateful for the privilege.
CDD-Ghana believes that the object of inviting key stakeholders to submit memoranda to support the work on the RTI Bill was to assist the Joint Committee to have information that will help to have a robust RTI law that befits the over seventeen years of waiting and also meet international standards. Unfortunately, the laying of the report by the Joint Committee a few weeks ago has given all key stakeholders cause for great concern because we observed from the report that a number of very important recommendations were not considered.
We have not lost hope, we have trust in our Parliament and the leadership just as the House worked so hard to pass a fairly good OSP Bill, we believe there is still a window of opportunity for the House to consider very critical areas of the RTI bill so we can have an RTI law that will serve Ghanaians well and meet international standards and expectations.
Hon. Members, kindly permit me to take you through a few areas that are of great concern to CDD-Ghana and its partners, the RTI coalition and the RTI Action Campaign Group.Provisions that must be deleted or amended
1. Clause 13 must be deleted
The Right to Information is guaranteed under the 1992 Constitution in Article 21 (1) (f). In a democracy, it means that information collected by public institutions are collected on behalf of citizens and should be made accessible to them. That is why any good RTI law emphasises the principles of maximum and proactive disclosure. However, it is recognized that in certain circumstances it will be useful not to disclose information. There are two main limitations provided by the Constitution and they are very specific: public interest including national security and public health and privacy.
To satisfy the principles of clarity, narrowness and specificity required for any limitation to the right to information, the Bill provides exemptions in relation to information at the Presidency, Cabinet, international relations, law enforcement, defence and privacy, among others. However, after providing this elaborate limitation to our human rights then in Clause 13 it proceeds to provide a blanket exemption for information held by public institutions.  Please indulge us to read Clause 13 ….Clause 13 states:
Internal working information of Public Institution
13 (1) Information is exempt from disclosure which, if disclosed would reveal
a) an opinion, an advice, a report or a recommendation prepared or recorded or
b) a consultation or a deliberation held in the course of or for the purpose of making a decision in the public service or a public institution and which can reasonably be expected to frustrate or inhibit the candid and deliberative process of a public institution or between public institutions.
Clause 13 goes on to state under subclause 2 that if the information is already public as a basis of a public policy or contains statistical information then the information is not exempt.
This provision, if kept, fundamentally undermines the entirety of the Bill. First, the rationale for excluding such basic information is outside of the limitations that the Constitution provides (public interest including national security and public health and privacy). Second, the practical effect of Clause 13 is that almost all documents in the public service will become exempt information. Memos, advice and evaluations are at the core of the propriety of decision making in public institutions. In fact, if you keep Clause 13 you can delete all the public interest exemptions currently in the bill because they become redundant. What this provision is telling us is that documents like evaluation documents of an Entity Tender Committee is exempt information or the report of a technical committee to a minister to make a decision in the public interest is exempt information.  Clause 13 thus provides a blanket exemption, which is inconsistent with the Bill itself, which says exemptions must be narrow and specific relating to the public interest imperative and protection of privacy; this is untenable and must be deleted.
It has been argued that Clause 17 that provides for a harms test is sufficient to cure this problem.  It does not. The harms test is the last resort where information that is exempt under law can be disclosed because the benefits of disclosure outweigh the harm that non-disclosure will. This is not information that should be exempt in the first place for one to use the harms test. In addition, by making Clause 13 an exempt clause, the bill would have shifted the burden of proof from the public institution to the citizen. So now we have to prove that there must be disclosure because the public interest benefit outweighs the harm it may have caused if disclosed. This again is untenable. [Refer to harms test as discussed by Justice Anthony Yeboah in Lolan Sagoe Case – bus branding saga]2. Office of the President must be defined under Clause 5
Parliament should define ‘Office of the President’ under clause 91 (interpretation section). Clause 5 states that information is exempt if prepared for the submission or submitted to the Office of the President and Vice President. There are so many offices under the Office of the President; is it the case that information prepared or submitted to the Ghana Aids Commission or the Ministry of Special Development Initiatives, for example, who are under the Office of the President, are exempt? We are very sure that is not the intention of the bill because it will take it outside reasonable limitations under the Constitution. We are asking for this provision to be defined in Clause 91.3. Clause 12 should be deleted
Clause 12 states that information obtained from a tax return or gathered for the purpose of determining tax liability is exempt information. The effect of this clause is to invariably make information relating to tax administration exempt information which defeats government’s own objective on tax governance and increasing domestic resource mobilization, a major indicator in the Ghana Beyond Aid agenda. Payment of tax is a legal obligation and must be applied in a transparent manner. It is a contradiction that this is the same State that seeks to fight tax evasion and illicit financial flows. That objective is not going to be achieved by throwing a blanket over the activities of the GRA.
We are asking for clause 12 to be deleted altogether because the genuine objective of Clause 12 is to protect personal tax information which is already provided for in clause 16 under Disclosure of Personal Matters which includes information likely to reveal “confidential professional, commercial or financial affairs”.4. Clause 8 and 9: Delete ‘prejudice’ and keep ‘Damage’
In Clauses 8 and 9 the Bill established very different thresholds for determining whether information is exempt in relation to international relations and defence/security. An information officer making this decision can either choose the higher threshold of information reasonably expected to cause ‘damage’ to the lower threshold of information reasonably expected to ‘prejudice’ relations or defence of the State. Certainly, if human right to information is to be limited it must require a higher threshold. This creates a big loophole for public institutions to deny information because it is likely to embarrass government.5. Clause 85 and 92: Delete clause 85 and 92 and replace with a new clause dealing with primacy of the Act
The current provision dealing with the primacy of the RTI law is inadequate and must be addressed to avoid unnecessary litigation. The RTI Bill seeks to elaborate on the constitutionally guaranteed right and should, therefore, be the reference point for all enactments dealing with the right to information. The current provision in Clause 92 subjecting all enactments to RTI law is not comprehensive. For example, it refers to all enactments providing for the disclosure of information, not enactments relating to state secrets and an oath that obliges non-disclosure of information.
We propose that Clause 92 also refers to enactments providing for non-disclosure of information.6. Clause 89: Application to the relevant private sector should be mandatory, not discretionary
The Bill struggles with extending the law to relevant private sector entities and actors. This is because it seeks to expand the conditions for an extension to go beyond a private sector receiving public resources. To cure the problem, it gives the Attorney-General discretionary power to extend the law to cover private sector through a legislative instrument. Our position is this; there is no ambiguity that a private entity using public resources should be subject to the provisions of the law. So if the Bill wants to consider other conditions outside of it, it must oblige the AG within a specific time frame to do the extension. [But why at all is this necessary after we have redefined “public institution” to which information is accessible to include any private organization “which receives public resources”?7. Clause 18: Now citizens must show an ID card to access information
The Joint Committee is proposing an amendment to Clause 18 to require citizens to show an ID when they apply for information. In this day of technology are we suggesting that people should physically throng public institutions to apply for information? It is not practicable and not progressive. Certainly, it is important for people to identify themselves but if the information is supposed to be provided to the general public then it is not essential to worry about the identity of the applicant. 8. Clause 38: Applicants are to apply to the Supreme Court when they are denied information
The Joint Committee is proposing that applicants should head to the Supreme Court if they are denied access to information. The proposal to invoke the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is erroneous in this instance. Article 33 of the 1992 Constitution is very clear that the High Court is the forum for enforcing all rights under the Constitution. [The basis of the RTI is Article 21 which is a chapter 5 right. These rights are enforceable via Article 33 also under chapter 5]. Article 135 has to do with the disclosure of documents during judicial proceedings when national security considerations are raised.9. Clause 3: Expand the list of types of information to be disclosed
To provide the appropriate guidance on the types of information that should be disclosed proactively, the Bill should adopt the proposals of Article 7 of the Model Law on Access to Information in Africa.  These include:
(a) manuals, policies, procedures or rules or similar instruments which have been prepared for, or are used by, officers of the body in discharging that body’s functions, exercising powers and handling complaints, making decisions or recommendations or providing advice to persons outside the body with respect to rights, privileges or benefits, or to obligations, penalties or other detriments to or for which persons may be entitled
(b) any prescribed forms, procedures, processes and rules for engagement by members of the public with the public body or relevant private body; the particulars of any arrangement, statutory or otherwise, that exists for consultation with, or representation by, members of the public in relation to the formulation or implementation of its policies or similar documents;
(c) whether meetings of the public body or relevant private body, including its boards, councils, committees or similar other bodies, are open to members of the public and, if so, the process for direct or indirect engagement; but where a meeting is not open to the public, the body must proactively make public the contents of submissions received, the process for decision making and decisions reached;
(d) detailed information on the design and execution of any subsidy programmes implemented with public funds, including the amounts allocated and expended, the criteria for accessing the subsidy, and the beneficiaries;
(e) all contracts, licenses, permits, authorizations and public-private partnerships granted by the public body or relevant private body;
(f) reports containing the results of surveys, studies or tests, including scientific or technical reports and environmental impact assessment reports, prepared by the public body or relevant private body; and
(g) any other information that may be applicable.Conclusion
CDD-Ghana and its partners would like the House to consider these critical areas and diligently work to give the nation a Bill that will make it easy for citizens’ to access information, support the efforts to fight corruption and put Ghana on the international level as a country that took its time to have a good RTI law. Already international organizations like the Center for Law and Democracy have done analysis and ratings on the RTI Bill and the results are not the best. We are pleading with the leadership to lead on this issue to help pass the RTI Bill in a more progressive form.
Thank You
I conclude My Take by inviting all to observe what appears to me to be a rather curious development. This was an earlier concern I deem valid though the process may have passed a stage to revert to comply with article 106. What informs or is the purpose for removing section 82 on application of the law to chieftaincy. It is instructive to note that this is perhaps the only and first ever formal and legal attempt to place an obligation on chiefs and chieftains to account to their ‘subjects’ especially for the use of mineral resources.
I am interested in learning about the compelling justification for the removal of the provision which exited in the 2016 Bill. All that was required was to first do them the honour of introducing it to them even if the Constitution had not required in article 106 clause 3 that a bill affecting the institution of chieftaincy ought to have prior reference to the National House of Chiefs.
Samson Lardy ANYENINI
June 30, 2018"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"147"	2018-06-26	" Over 200 participants who took part in a district sensitization workshop on the Right to Information Bill (RTI) have called on Parliament to expedite action and pass a credible law, which will benefit the ordinary citizens of the country.
 In a petition to Parliament, the participants urged Parliament to reconsider the blanket exemption for information held by public institutions, information from the Office of the President and information gathered to determine the tax liability of people.
 The participants were drawn from the East Akim and Fanteakwa North and South Districts as part of a community engagement to sensitize the citizens on the provisions of the RTI Bill.
 The Programme Officer for Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII) and a member of Right to Information Action Campaign group, organizers of the programme, Mr Jacob Tetteh Ahuno explained that the sensitization became necessary because it was realized that most of the citizens who will be beneficiaries when the RTI Bill was passed were not aware of what was entailed in the current Bill.
 Mr Ahonu said the sensitization was to mobilize the people for participation in the governance process and demand accountability and transparency.
 A participant, Ms Doreen Gakpo, a nurse, said the inability to pass the RTI Bill over the years was the lack of the political will on the part of Parliament and governments to see the Bill passed into law.
 She said the MPs have forgotten about the interest of the people they were representing."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"148"	2018-06-24	"The Chairman of the Right to Information coalition, Seth Abloso, has said that Ghana cannot fight the menace of corruption effectively if ministers still double as Members of Parliament.
According to Seth, combining the two duties makes it difficult for the legislature to supervise duties of the executive thus, making it dependent.
He said checks and balances must be operated without fear or favour, and therefore ministers and Members of Parliament must perform their duties independently of each other in order to effectively deal with corruption.
“We need to look at how our constitution is to be fashioned to promote good governance, because if the sitting president chooses the majority of his ministers from Parliament that is where the problem is. Parliament must do Parliamentary work and the ministers must do their executive work. They must be made to work independently in order to begin tackling corruption. We need to deal with passive corruption practices, because highly-placed individuals overlook corrupt practices and this goes a long way to affect everyone.”
Mr. Abloso made these statements during a media engagement on the RTI bill, organised by the Ghana Integrity Initiative Consortium as part of its regional sensitisation programme.
The aim is to build the capacity of the media to become good advocates and make proposals and amendments to the bill before it is passed into a law.
Seth said: “We decided to begin sensitisation with the media because the media are the eyes of society. They amplify our concerns for duty-bearers to give our concerns that due attention”.
He said the bill, when passed, will become a beacon of light because corrupt practices will not be able to be hidden, suggesting that the constitution must not permit ministers to double as Members of Parliament.
He added that: “Resources of this country must be distributed to every society. The Right to Information bill is not for citizens only: it is for everyone resident in Ghana. All exceptions, according to the bill, should be subject to the harm-test principle”.
During his presentation, Sammy Obeng of PNAfrica encouraged journalists to be proactive in joining the campaign to make sure the bill works. He said it is necessary for journalists to read and understand the bill and its different components in order to best practice it.
He noted that it is irrelevant for people to think the media will use it on politicians, adding that Information on public contracts and all other information should be available because public resources are used on such contracts.
Sammy added: “There are little things that we have discussed with the coalition, such as fees and the number of days involved in accessing the information. The information government is collating is on our behalf; we are the reason they are generating that information, therefore if someone applies for an information you don’t need to ask them to pay. If you need additional services, such as photocopies or scanned copies, then of course you need to pay; but if it is just for processing the information, then it has to be free”.
He noted that another issue brought to bear was the fact that an individual is expected to wait 14 days for information to be confirmed available, and another 14 days for that information to be released. He said it is too long a period and is one of the issues raised before the committee to be addressed.
Sammy Obeng advised the media to take the RTI seriously, because the media thrives on information.  He said passage of the bill into law will make the media’s work easier and better.
“This will curb people from denying you information because it has become your right. Questions like ‘Who are you?’; ‘Who sent you?’, and ‘What are you going to use the information for?’ are asked – and sometimes after all these questions, you are denied the information. So the law is very important because when there are no guidelines, everyone does what they like.”
On his part, Dr. Kojo Asante of CDD Ghana noted that: “Last year, several bills were passed and presented to parliament. If this is so, then it means the same level of attention and urgency that was used should be given to the bills presented this year. So, it is my expectation that these bills – especially the RTI bill, as per the example of last year – will get passed; and that is why we are calling on the media and civil society to mount pressure and remind them that they had an almost-100 percent record last year, so let’s repeat it this year”."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"149"	2018-06-20	"The government has been urged to show more commitment to fight corruption and promote transparency by passing the Right to Information Bill (RTI) into law to empower citizens to demand information on activities of public institutions.
This formed the core of issues raised by stakeholders at a sensitization forum on RTI in Tamale to mobilize public support for the passage of RTI before the end of this year.
Participants were drawn from civil society organizations (CSOs), academia, religious institutions, traditional authorities, National Commission for Civic Education, district assemblies, and social groups.
 Mr Mohammed Mumuni, Team Leader, Northern Region Networking Centre of SEND-Ghana, said the passage of RTI into law would enhance citizens’ participation in the affairs of the state, which would keep duty-bearers on their toes thereby ensuring accountability and transparency.
Mr Mumuni said the passage of the RTI Bill into law would also ensure availability of information for CSOs’ active participation in the affairs of the state because CSOs depended on information from public institutions to undertake their development work.
 He said, “If there is no law to ensure access to free and timely information, then there is no way the public can actively participate in the development process to hold duty-bearers accountable.”
 Mr Adam Baani Natomah, an Anti-corruption Officer at the Northern Regional Office of the Commission on Human Rights and Administration Justice, said the passage of the RTI Bill into law would strengthen efforts to fight corruption in the country.
Mr Natomah said such a law would also enable the citizenry to track the performance of duty-bearers and ensure proper record keeping by institutions for effective administration."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"150"	2018-06-19	" Mr Mohammed Mumuni, Team Leader for SEND-GHANA, has called on the media to be the lead advocate for the legislature to pass the Right To Information (RTI) Bill into law.
 He said everybody was entitled to the right to access information from public institutions to contribute to the development of the nation, and stressed the need for the media to intensify advocacy for the passage of the Bill.
 He made the call in Tamale on Tuesday at an event organized by SEND Ghana to engage the media in a form of sensitisation on the RTI Bill.
 The event was aimed at equipping the media with information on the RTI Bill, so as to use such information for effective advocacy.
 Mr Mumuni said the passage of the Bill was crucial since it would enhance transparency and accountability in the public institutions, which called for the need for the media and civic societies to join forces to push for the Bill to be passed into law.
 Mr Adam Baani, Resource Person, Commission for Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), said the RTI Bill if passed would help fight against corruption in the country and added that the Bill must be extended to enable the public to access information from private institutions.
 He urged the media to educate the public on the relevance of the RTI Bill to promote its passage.
 Mr Zakaria Mahama, Northern Regional RTI Coalition Coordinator, said the Bill would ensure proper record keeping and efficiency in both private and public institutions’ administrations, which needed to be passed into law."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"151"	2018-06-18	" The Programs Officer of Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition (GACC), Kwesi Boateng Assumeng, has raised concerns about some clauses in the current Right to Information (RTI) Bill, saying their inclusion in the bill would render it “useless.”
 According to him, “Information on tax liabilities should be made available and maintaining them as exempt information only implies that object of the RTI Bill has been defeated.”
 “Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition (GACC) is of the view that some salient clauses of the Bill need to be looked at- Clause 12 that borders on exempt provision on tax liabilities and tax returns.
 “It’s in government’s own interest to make available tax liabilities information so that we know that the appropriate bodies are paying the right kind of tax,” he added.
 He said this in Ho, the Volta Regional Capital when the (RTI) Coalition, made up of public, private and civil society organizations (CSOs), took its campaign to the region.
 The coalition’s focus is to promote good governance and fight corruption in Ghana.
 For almost two decades, the Ghana Anti- Corruption Coalition (GACC), Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII) and SEND-Ghana have been leading the campaign for the passage of the RTI Bill into law.
 The meeting in Ho was to engage the media and inform them about key aspects to ensure a formidable and credible RTI Law.
 The RTI Bill, which is expected to make credible information readily available to every Ghanaian to help promote transparency in the public sector, has been in Parliament for over 17 years because successive governments have failed to pass it despite numerous assurances.
 Mr Assumeng disclosed that principles on maximum disclosure and proactive disclosure should be considered to enable Ghanaians obtain a credible law.
 Despite the challenges, Mr Assumeng applauded the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for reviewing two clauses in the RTI Bill"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"152"	2018-06-13	"The Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII) and the Right to Information (RTI) Coalition, have expressed concern about some clauses in the impending Right to Information Bill currently before Parliament.
 According to them, the Bill did not elaborate on the kinds of information to be proactively disclosed, whereas there were too many exemption clauses that might undermine the principles of proactive and maximum disclosure. 
  They were also not happy with the fee regime for lodging a request and the timelines for responding to request and therefore wanted the fee regime to be omitted and the timeline reduced.
    Again, they were proposing an amendment to Clause 18 which required citizens to show an ID when they applied for information with the explanation that if information was supposed to be provided to the public, it was not essential to worry about the identity of the applicant.  
Mr Seth Abloso, Chairman of the RTI Coalition, who shared these sentiments during a Regional sensitisation workshop on the RTI Bill in Cape Coast, said it was imperative that those provisions were amended to ensure that Ghana had a credible RTI law.
The programme with support from the Accountable Democratic Institutions and Systems Strengthening (ADISS) among other things aimed at sensitising citizens on the provisions of the RTI Bill.
It also sought to educate people on the law making process to create an opportunity and an enabling environment for citizens and other key stakeholders to ask questions and debate relevant issues for a credible RTI law.
Mr Abloso indicated that those provisions in Ghana’s RTI Bill did not correspond with the AU Model Law, which said the costs for seeking information should not be as high as to deter people from accessing the information requested and also the costs should only be for reproduction, translation and transcription.
 According to him, information was time sensitive and should be accessed within a reasonable time and therefore excessive long timelines defeated the purpose of the RtI. 
  He said information was critical for the development of every nation and that there was an obligation on public officials to promote full disclosure for right holders.
   Mr Abloso said passing a credible RTI law would facilitate the effective participation of citizens in the affairs of state, facilitate the welfare of citizens, and promote transparency which ultimately would inure to the benefit of the nation. 
 Mr Jacob Tetteh Ahuno, Programmes Officer of GII, implored Ghanaian journalist to join the RTI Action Campaign and use their platforms to engage parliamentarians for the passage of the Bill into law."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"153"	2018-06-12	"The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) has accused Parliament’s joint committee on Legal, Constitutional Affairs and Communications of deliberately omitting key inputs made by the coalition after a meeting aimed at making amendments that will ensure that Ghana has a comprehensive bill.
The group has been pushing for the amendment of some clauses in the Right to Information bill which is before parliament.
Chairman of the RTI Coalition, Seth Abloso said the group identified several loopholes in the bill in its current state which need to be addressed before it is passed.
But the two committees of parliament working on the bill expunged their contributions to satisfy selfish motives, he alleged.
“We were invited to join them to make inputs and we are surprised most of the inputs we made are missing in the report the committee has presented to parliament,” Mr. Abloso told Starr news’ Asabea Akonor
“So, I will want to say that it is inadvertent that it is an oversight,” he added.
The Right to Information Bill was laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok in March and it has been 22 years since the first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
Also, it is 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"154"	2018-06-08	" Civil Society Organisations (CSO) Platform on Sustainable Development Goals has expressed their intense desire to see Ghana pass Right To Information (RTI) law that meets global standards.
 The Platform’s desire to see Ghana’s RTI Bill being passed into law in line with international standard is borne out of the country’s thriving democracy and its accolade as the beacon of rule of law in Africa.
 Mrs Ugonna Ukaigwe, the National Coordinator of CSO Platform, expressed the desire in an interview with the GNA on the sidelines of a media sensitization forum in Wa, the Upper West Regional capital.
 The forum was on Ghana’s RTI Bill 2018 under the RTI Action Campaign championed by the Accountable Democratic Institutions and Systems Strengthening (ADISS) Consortium and RTI Coalition.
 Mrs Ukaigwe said because of Ghana’s high democratic credentials it is essential the country had an information law that could be used as a reference point in Africa and worldwide.
 “Our Parliamentarians should see the need for our bill to be very progressive and as close as possible to international standards,” she said: “we cannot afford to fall short of that”.
 Lawmakers would have to address outstanding issues in the current Bill including issues of exemptions and the time it would take a public official to decide to either grant or not to grant a request for the release of information.
 Mrs Ukaigwe said the CSOs have raised several concerns against exemption of information from the Office of the President, arguing: those exemptions should be issue-based and not institutional-based.
 Where an officer had to take 14 days to decide whether to grant a request for information or not was also objected to, she added: arguing that 14 days was too much for an officer to take only a decision on a request.
 The issue of filing fee was equally objected by the Coalition members who rather proposed that persons requesting information be allowed to pay for the cost of generating that information only.
 Vast proposals have been made to parliament for consideration, which Mrs Ukaigwe said in the CSOs engagements with the lawmakers, it was clear they were ready to listen to the inputs and improve the Bill.
 The RTI Bill might not be passed without the media; she noted and urged journalists to help educate the public on the Bill.
 She also highlighted the need to monitor compliance with the law once it was passed.
 Advocacy by CSOs for passage of Ghana’s RTI Bill into law had been ongoing for about 17 years.
 Efforts to get successive governments to pass the Bill drafted in 2002 has not yielded the desired results, though; some progress had been made concerning content review.
 In view of this, Mrs Rachel Gyabaah, the Programme Officer of SEND-Ghana, ADISS Consortium and RTI Coalition in February 2018, launched a joint Campaign (RTl Action Campaign).
 They had funding support from ADISS to put the RTI Bill on the front burner of policy in 2018 and secure its passage before the year ended.
 Since then, series of multi-stakeholder meetings and coordinated advocacy initiatives have been going on with key CSOs, culminating in the Executive laying the Bill in Parliament on 23rd March 2018."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"155"	2018-06-07	" The Right to Information (RTI) Bill has been taken through the second reading in Parliament for the House to adopt and later pass into law.
 Various attempts have been made in the past to pass the bill into law to give effect to Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution.
 Mr Ben Abdallah Banda, Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs who presented the Committee’s report stated that the objective of the bill was to enhance access to information from public and some private institutions in ensuring transparency and accountability and for contributing towards the fight against corruption in the country.
 The joint committees on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs worked on the bill which had been moving in and out of parliament over the years.
 Mr Abdallah Banda also explained that the RTI bill gave the right to individuals to access information held by public and some private institutions, however it did not apply to information already held in archives, museums and libraries.
 He said the bill also detailed the procedure by which information held by certain private sector entities could be accessed and a provision had been made in the bill to allow for a legislative instrument to prescribe the scope of access to information.
 Mr Banda also noted that the Bill exempted certain category of information from being disclosed.
 Among the exempt classes of information are those prepared for submission to the President, the Vice President and Cabinet.
 Other exemptions include; those relating to law enforcement and public safety, international relations, defence and security of the state and the personal information of individuals.
 He said all public institutions would be required by the law to appoint a focal person to facilitate the implementation of the Act.
 He said designated information officers are required to receive application from the public seeking information from public institutions and an information officer who refuses or neglects to perform any of such functions under the law commits a gross misconduct.
 Mr Banda further noted that the bill seeks to establish a Right to Information Commission which would be an independent entity to monitor the implementation of the RTI in Ghana and the commission would also have the responsibility to promote and sensitise the public on their constitutional right to information.
 Alhaji Inusah Fuseini, Ranking Member on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in his contribution dispelled the fears of civil society groups who raised concerns about the exemptions that had been made in the bill.
 He assured them that clause 17 of the bill was there to take care of the concerns raised by the civil society groups and therefore called on members to make relevant inputs into the amendment of the bill before it is finally passed into law."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"156"	2018-06-06	"Media practitioners in the Western Region have been urged to use their platforms to help educate the public on the Right To Information (RTI) bill.
Mrs Linda Ofori-Kwafo, Executive Director of Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII), said this was to ensure that when the RTI bill is passed into law it's usage would be easier.
She made the call in Takoradi at a day's training programme on the RTI bill for more than fifty journalists in the Western Region.
Mrs  Ofori-Kwafo said the regional sensitization on the RTI bill for this year, was organized by GII together with the RTI Action Campaign and RTI Coalition and was been implemented under the Accountable Democratic Institutions and Systems Strengthening (ADISS) project.
Topics that were treated include 'principles of the RTI bill', 'walk through the RTI bill 2018 and RTI Bill’: 'Where are we now and opportunities for civil society inputs going forward'.
The Executive Director of GII emphasized that they would tour the ten regions across the nation to ensure that civil society organizations become abreast with the content of the RTI bill.
   She called on the media to solidly back them to ensure that the RTI bill which has been before Parliament for seventeen years becomes a law.
Speaking on the principles of the RTI bill, Mr Seth Abloso, Chairperson of RTI Coalition, explained that the cost for seeking information should not be so high as to deter people from accessing the information request.
He said the cost should only be for reproduction, translation and transcription.
Mr Abloso said information was time sensitive and should be accessed within a reasonable time and added that excessive long timeliness defeats the purpose of the RTI.
He noted that all exempt information should be subjected to the harm test.
He stressed that \"The Harm Test Principle states that information should be disclosed if the benefit of disclosure outweighs the harm that the disclosure will cause\".
According to Mr Abloso all requestors have the right to appeal the decision by the public institution to refuse or deny access to information."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"157"	2018-05-22	"An improved version of the Right to Information (RTI) bill is ready to be laid before parliament for the second time this year, Minority Leader of Parliament Haruna Iddrisu has revealed.
The bill which was first laid under a certificate of urgency during the last meeting of parliament this year was withdrawn the same day and re-laid to be taken through the normal parliamentary procedure.
While on recess, the joint committees on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs worked on the over decade-old bill which has been moving in and out of parliament over the years.
When parliament resumed from recess last week, Speaker of Parliament tasked the committee working on the RTI bill to expedite action on its report and present same before the House for consideration.
At a media encounter Wednesday, Mr. Iddrisu, said the bill has been improved and is ready to be brought before parliament again.
“There is commitment by the new administration to see it happen. It is one of the bills that has seen a lot of improvement so it should be easier for us to see it through when it comes back as we take it through the second reading,” he said.
“So RTI is ready and it has been scheduled by the business committee, it came up at our last meeting and in fact, you may see it on Wednesday next week”, he said.Background
The RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The bill will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society”.
The right to information bill has in the past been introduced to parliament but always expired on the resolution of parliament."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"158"	2018-05-20	"Pressure Group, OccupyGhana has proposed that the creation and building up of “Public Records” at the Public Records and Archives Administration Department (PRAAD) should become a focus of the right to information regime, as it provides a simpler access procedure to information.
OccupyGhana believes “once we cultivate a habit of routinely building up the store of public records, it would hopefully reduce the need to resort to Right to Information processes to have access to information because the bulk of that information would already be in the public records stored at PRAAD.”
This proposal was contained in a memoranda addressed to the Attorney-General & Minister of Justice as the country seeks inputs from civil society organisations into the formulation of the Right to Information (RTI) bill.Below is the full memorandum:
May 21, 2018
The Attorney-General & Minister for Justice
Attorney-General’s Department
Accra
Dear Madam:
Memorandum of OccupyGhana on the Right to Information Bill, 2018
We apologise for the delay in submitting this memorandum to you on the 2018 Right to Information Bill.
We are very concerned about having easy access to contracts that the government or its agencies enter into. And this brings to the fore the critical right to information role that Public Records and Archives Administration Department (PRAAD) is expected to play under the provisions of the Public Records and Archives Administration Act, 1997 (Act 535), which does not appear to have attracted much attention in the review of the right to information so far (See also the provisions of the Public Records and Archives Administration Department (Establishment) Instrument, 1996 (LI 1628)).
As a key existing right to information-relevant legislation, we propose that the creation and building-up of “Public Records” at PRAAD should become a focus of the right to information regime, as it provides a simpler access procedure to information that has become public record by being filed with PRAAD. Once we cultivate a habit of routinely building up the store of public records, it would hopefully reduce the need to resort to RTI process to have access to information because the bulk of that information would already be in the public records stored at PRAAD.
Section 26 of Act 535 defined “public records” to include “records that belong to the Republic created, received and maintained:
(i) by a public office, by a Minister or any other person responsible for a public office or by any other officer or employee of a public office;
(ii) by a Court with jurisdiction within the Republic or by a Justice or other officer of that Court; [and/or]
(iii) by any other body or individual so designated by the Regulations.”
Once a matter is considered “public record” by Act 535, PRAAD would have automatic access to it even if it has not been formally filed. That is why it is provided under section 24 of Act 535 that
“A person who without reasonable cause, denies access to a public record to an official of the Department commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred penalty units or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months or to both the fine and the imprisonment.”
In our view, there must be a side-by-side consideration of the provisions of Act 535 and the RTI Bill so that they complement and strengthen each other.
Further, and with specific reference to contracts, section 23(1) of the State Property and Contracts Act, 1960 (CA 6) provides that copies of contracts to which Ghana is a party should be kept by the PRAAD. The formulation of the law as it stands now reads as follows:
“The original copy of a contract or an agreement entered into for and on behalf of the Republic shall be kept by the Government Archivist.”
We see two main issues arising from this provision:
(1) it does not provide a time within which the relevant government agency that entered into the contract must submit it to the “Government Archivist,” which to all intents and purposes is now the PRAAD, and
(2) this appears to be limited to contracts to which the Republic is directly a party and not to all contracts by all statutory corporations and government agencies.
We propose that the proposed Right to Information Act should amend section 23(1) to read as follows:
“The original copy of a contract of a Government Contract shall be submitted by the designated officer of the ministry or other government agency, statutory body, or statutory corporation which entered into it, to the Public Records and Archives Administration Department within 30 days of its execution, for filing.”
Then it should adopt and adapt the definition of “Government Contract” in the Government Contracts (Protection) Act, 1979 (AFRCD 58) to read as follows:
“‘Government Contract’ means a contract entered into by or on behalf of the government, any agency of government, statutory or public corporation, or a company in which the state has a controlling interest for the performance of a work or service for or the supply of goods to the government, agency of government, corporation or company.”
Respectfully submitted,
For: OccupyGhana Legal Team (OGLT)
cc. The Clerk
Parliament House
Accra
The Convener
RTI Action Campaign
Accra"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"159"	2018-05-16	"Right to Information and Affirmative Action. Two Bills. Unpassed. Much debated. Can we move from rhetoric to reality with these two pieces of crucial legislation? Can we turn laudable speeches into actual passage? Can we leave behind 13 years of debate and discussion about one of the Bills only for it to languish unpassed; a silenced footnote in another Parliamentary sitting.  Right now, the RTI Bill is not on this sitting of Parliament’s Business List – but it is on ours.And it should stay there.
The Right to Information Bill has had a journey of stops and starts and in-betweens. Right now? The Bill is on a tour of some regional capitals for what a joint committee of Parliament says is more ‘stakeholder consultation.’ The Bill was drafted in 1999, reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament until 2010. Since that initial presentation, Parliament has debated it, referred it and moved it – it however has not passed it. This Bill has gone through three Speakers and three Parliaments.
It is a crucial weapon in the battle to beat corruption – and so there is clear incentive for any political side to simply keep delaying it.
This is a cycle of commitment followed by inaction. It is a broken record. This government’s mantra to protect the public purse, root out corruption leaving no place to hide is made more real if they actually pass the legislation that makes what is a now weary speech an actual reality.
It doesn’t take Einstein to recognize why the passage of this legislation is confronting as many bumps and bruises on its road to passage. Bumps and bruises are unwelcome friends for all of us who daily navigate Ghana’s liberally pot-holed roads. Coalitions fighting for this RTI Bill to pass are now weaponizing it to question President Akufo-Addo’s integrity as a president.So, the Bill is on tour.
I wonder how many tours this Bill may go on as it is stalled and halted before being tucked away, relegated to the next presidential aspirant to weaponize it on the airwaves and promise that it will be passed under their watch. The political party in opposition commit to dust it off and rev it back into action.  Only to stall once in office.
‘Bills, Bills, Bills’ is also the name of a hit by million dollar record selling girl group Destiny’s Child. They also went on tour with that track. Their track made it, millions sang it and it remains a hit to this day.
While Destiny’s Child had a hit with ‘Bills, Bills, Bills’ and went on tour with their hit; in order to ascertain whether the RTI could be a hit with the public and us in the media it would have to be passed.
Will we only sing the blues of the so far unpassed but currently on tour ‘Right to Information’ Bill?Chale, life.
What would I go looking for once that Bill is passed? The Bill will likely reveal just how poorly records are kept. That revelation may trigger a call to action about efficacy within the grindingly slow bureaucracy that can be government work and Ministries motion. We will likely be frustrated by the challenge to access the very information that might be transformative.
But that is premature. Frankly, nor is it the point. The Bill is symbolic of a step forward in our democracy and the work – particularly – of the Media to pursue stories that too often stay suspended between warring party political factions rather than seeking information to either back a perspective,  effectively challenge it and most importantly potentially resolve it. And the Bill is substantive in granting citizens access to understand processes that are too often left to sometimes unsubstantiated accusations and uninformed opinions by one political party or another.
One great opportunity to use the RTI Bill – if it were currently in effect – is to access the actual procurement papers that are currently the focus of warring perspectives regarding the Mobile Money Interoperability deal between Sibton and the Bank of Ghana. The Government are claiming major money saving; the former deputy governor of Bank of Ghana dispute this. There has been a back and forth exchange of figures. I listened to morning radio where Starr FM’s Francis Abban interviewed a number of players engaged in the deal. These multiple perspectives accused, defended, dismissed, insisted and argued regarding the amounts involved, how much is saved and by whom, and how much is being lost and by whom. The wealth of perspectives are engaging and revealing – but access to the details of the deal would transform the nature of this story.Chale, politics.
The Affirmative Action Bill. A quick Google search reveals a long list of calls, pleas, debates, demands for this Bill to finally become active legislation. Such debates featured the Head of the Gender Committee who told listeners on a Morning Show debate that some of the men of in Parliament were nervous that equity would dissolve male dominance. Patriarchy is a global beast; so male dominance is not going anywhere….yet.
Finally, this Bill is before Parliament. So said the President during the World Press Freedom Day gala dinner. The Affirmative Action Bill is a societal game-changer. Sure, we have had the 1998 Cabinet Directive which provided a set of guidelines for the systematic and sustained implementation of aspects of affirmative action towards equality of rights and opportunities for women in Ghana. But the Bill will provide legally mandated systems, structures and policies to ensure women’s equal participation.
Policy matters. Legislation matters. They offer us tools to rally behind the notion that a nation cannot keep overlooking 52% of a nation’s population.Representation is much more than numbers. But numbers matter. They are a crucial place to start.
Beyond numbers, of course the quality of who represents us is an equally crucial topic for dissection. It’s the ‘C’ word: competence. This word is too often employed to question and challenge women’s ability to contribute to our political discourse. It is often deployed by men when discussing women and their call for equity in political representation.  And it is too rarely applied to the multiple men who do represent us politically, but for some of whom mediocrity is more applicable to their skillset than competence.
These two pieces of legislation invite particular questions about where we are in this project we call democracy and more specifically nation-building.
Measuring the mantra that ‘change has come’ articulated on repeat by this government is more easily done when you can get access to the kind of information that offers specifics and doesn’t dabble in semantics.
It is a call to action for us in the Media. How effectively will this legislation be used? Consistent conversations about the necessity for training to strengthen skills and eliminate preventable errors in our media are a constant call by many – from politicians to civil society organizations to the public. They are right. This Legislation will require a Media to become equipped with solid research tools, critical analytical tools and the understanding that information translation for ease of comprehension by the public is particular work.Chale, training.
Ultimately, the real bill that should be served to the government is a Bill of Goods by the people of Ghana.
This is the Information age; how we use it cannot be determined until we can actually access it."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"160"	2018-05-14	" Speaker of Parliament, Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye, has directed the Joint Committee on Constitutional Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Communication to expedite action on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
 Parliament reconvened on Tuesday, 15 May 2018, for the Second Meeting of the Second Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Fourth Republic.
 Addressing legislators on Tuesday, Prof Oquaye told the Joint Committee to ensure it completes work on the RTI Bill expeditiously and “make a report as quickly as possible in order for us to deliberate thereof”.
 He further urged the legislators not to relent on their efforts to curb illegal mining and also work diligently to work on the other 48 bills scheduled for business during this session."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"161"	2018-05-08	" Majority leader and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu has said the passage of the Right to Information Bill will serve as a catalyst in ensuring that all other obstinate laws are adhered to.
 According to him, the assurance offered by the bill is critical for the development of Ghana’s democracy.
 Speaking at an ongoing Stakeholder forum on the RTI bill in Parliament, the Minister said, the list of the various information and classes from the various institutions to be accessed should be made very clear.
 “The processes and procedures to access relevant information must also be well reformed’ adding that the passage of the bill will also trigger  and  help in  bringing into fruition other laws particularly the law on persons living with disability” he said.
 The Right to Information Bill was laid before Parliament in March by the Deputy Attorney General, Joseph Kpemka.
 The Bill was referred to the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs of Committee of Parliament, but the Minority raised concerns about the Bill not being gazetted. Background
 The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
 The bill as has been drafted, is to give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.” The back and forth
 The Right to Information Bill was first drafted in 1999 under the former president, Jerry John Rawlings.
 Various advocacy groups emerged to press for the immediate passing of the bill into law in 2002. The draft bill was reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007.
 The National Democratic Congress (NDC) in its 2008 and 2012 election manifestos promised to ensure the bill was passed. In 2010, the bill was presented to Parliament for consideration.
 In 2011, the government signed unto the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative with a commitment to pass the bill. In November 2013, the bill was formally laid before parliament.
 Former Attorney General, Deputy Dominic Ayine in 2015, moved the bill for second reading in Parliament. In October 2016, the bill was withdrawn and replaced with a new one which was immediately laid.
 Following the dissolution of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic and the swearing-in of new Parliament in January 2017, the bill was no longer in Parliament and had to be re-laid by the new government before work commences on it again."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"162"	2018-05-06	"A University lecturer has tasked parliament to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill as an ideal way of demonstrating its commitment towards transparency and accountability.
    According to Dr Liz David-Barrett of the University of Sussex, UK, the critical aspect of transparency was giving people the right to information to enable them demand accountability and to check corrupt practices, particularly in public procurement.
    She was speaking during a two-day training workshop on \"Analysing Public Procurement Data for Corruption Risks\" which ended at Biriwa in the Central Region with a call on Governments to open up data on procurement and other contracting processes.
    She challenged the Government of Ghana to open up its contracting and procurement data to consolidate its anti-corruption commitment.
     The workshop organised by the University of Sussex and the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS) Ghana, was under the leadership of the Endowed Humboldt Research Chair, Prof. Olivier Menoukeu Pamen.
     It was supported by the Alexander Von Humboldt Foundation and the German Ministry of Education and Research and attended by more than fifty researchers from ten African countries.
    The training provided the platform for Mathematicians, Political Scientists and Civil Society Activists to explore the potential of using open-source software, such as R-InStat on the datasets of the World Bank-funded contracts in over one hundred countries.
    It formed part of a major research project funded by the British Academy and the Department for International Development (DFID), in collaboration with Dr Mihaly Fazekas of the University of London as part of its Anti-Corruption Evidence Program in curbing corruption in public procurement.
    Distinguished facilitators from prestigious universities and organisations in Europe and Ghana introduced participants to corruption risks in public procurement and red flag indicators of corruption risks and how to use R-Instat to analyse procurement data.
    She indicated that curbing corruption would be problematic especially in public procurement if governments were not committed to open up data and sharing of information.
    Dr David-Barrett consequently called on Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), international institutions and the citizenry to demand such data and put pressure on the government to make contracting as well as its partnerships open.
    Dr David-Barrett said availability of data and openness in the procurement process would mean that more analyses could be done to know where the big corruption lied and to give a direction for investigation so as to hold government and public officials accountable.
    Danny Parsons of the Mathematical Institute of the University of Oxford explained that though cases and their investigations could be very successful, more resources were needed to investigate a single case of corruption.
    He, however, implored governments to combine the analyses of mathematicians and statisticians in their efforts to fight corruption.
    “Opening up the data could mean, you can look at the whole set of contracts on a large scale not looking for specific cases, but looking for a pattern which can inform  where resources should be channel to  for more investigations” he explained.
    He said Governments stood to benefit from opening up their data because more people looking at the data also improved efficiency in the system.
    Professor Menoukeu Pamen explained that the R-Instat was able to analyse procurement data, show the characteristics and pull out the indicators for corruption in the public or private sector."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"163"	2018-05-04	" The Joint Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Communications of parliament will on Tuesday, 8 May 2018 hold a stakeholders conference on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
 The objective of the conference is to receive oral presentations from Civil Society Organisations (CSOs), relevant public institutions and experts in respect of the bill.
 It will also present the opportunity for all stakeholders to engage with the committee and vice versa.
 The conference is scheduled to take place at the Justice D.F. Annan Auditorium of the Job 600 complex, Parliament House, Accra.
 The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognised as a right under the International Convention on Human Rights, however the RTI bill, which arguably is the oldest before parliament has since not been passed since the first RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) 22 years ago.
 There have been calls by the Ghana Journalists Association and other civil society bodies for its quick passage since it has been in parliament for long."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"164"	2018-05-04	" President of the Ghana Journalists Association (GJA), Affail Monney has bemoaned the level of unprofessionalism exhibited by some individuals in the media landscape claiming to be journalists.
 According to him, the unprincipled and unethical approach in dealing with matters of importance by these individuals has contributed to wide-ranging problems witnessed in the practice of the profession.
 Speaking at a public lecture in commemoration of the World Press Freedom Day, Mr. Monney argued that, the inexistence of laws barring people without qualifications from practicing journalism has contributed to a great proportion of fake news peddled and distorted information disseminated into the public domain on daily basis in the country.
 “Anybody can practice journalism and our laws do not frown on that, so whether you are a Kenkey seller, a trotro mate (commercial bus conductor), or a politician, the law permits you to practice journalism,” he stated.
 Affail Monney advised persons already practicing journalism to exercise decorum in their line of duty and urged others interested to indulge in the profession to oblige the code of conduct stipulated by the Ghana Journalists Association (GJA) stressing the need for rigorous training to tidy up the system.
 “Anyone who decides to play the game of journalism should play it according to the rules and the rules contextually are the ethics of the profession and as far as ethics are concerned standards are not uniform…we have certain sections which also symbolize ethical bankruptcy,” he lamented.
 He held that there is the general practice of press freedom which protects many journalists across the world, however the freedom they enjoy must in no way be abused in effect.
 “The solution to this problem is training. The reality here is that many journalists are not educated, they are not trained in journalism. We have masonries who have invaded the media space and their intentions are clear for all to see. Many mascaraed as journalists but the fruits of ethical recklessness they bear, murderous intentions, slicing and dicing people’s hard-earned reputation.
 We have the freedom to abuse but there should be a limit to the abuse of freedom,” Mr. Monney added.
 He was speaking along the lines of the rate at which information is skewed by the press in the country where the Right to Information is sometimes curtailed in the absence of laws that warrants an individual to request for documents for educational and news worthy purposes.
 Meanwhile, President Nana Akufo-Addo has charged the media to meet the threat of fake news head-on.
 In his address at the World Press Freedom Day Awards Dinner on Wednesday evening, the President warned that the integrity of the media was at stake.
 Like has been noted globally, he said the phenomenon of fake news, if not checked, has the potential to undermine democracies.
 He also urged Ghanaians to continue to defend the right to free expression in the name of an open society and accountable governance.
 The United Nations on another hand has urged the government of Ghana see to it that the Right to Information bill is passed into a law to ensure that transparency prevails in governance with accurate reportage from the perspective of the media.
 The delays in the passing of the Bill according to Deputy Minister for Information, Ama Dokuaa Asiamah Agyei, is because other equally essential Bills need to be paid attention to first.22-year journey of Bill
 The RTI Bill, which is expected to make information easily accessible by the media and Ghanaians to boost the fight against corruption, has been in legislation for well over 17 years because successive governments have failed to ensure its passage despite several assurances.
 It was first drafted 22 years ago under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 It was subsequently withdrawn to review some clauses.
 Since then, efforts by several advocacy groups to put pressure on the duty bearers to have the Bill passed have also not yielded any positive results until now.
 Observers have criticized successive governments for lacking the political will to pass the Bill.
 The New Patriotic Party (NPP) government promised to pass the Bill when it assumed power in 2017."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"165"	2018-05-03	"The media has been referred to by several scholars as the fourth estate of the realm which presupposes that the relevance of the press in any polity is generally drawn from the fact that information is necessary for effective governance. To others, the press however, seem to have served as a conduit to push the ideas of radical democracy.
In other jurisdictions, the press has been accused of fomenting troubles in Africa and the world at large. Is the press by default the voice of the citizenry of states when same citizens become “king makers” by default under a constitutional democratic arrangement?; does the changing socio-cultural setting due to urbanization affect the lifestyle of Ghanaians and further shape their perception in elections in eclectic communities ?. The above notwithstanding, in Ghana, the press has over the years served as a driving force that instigates social and political change.
The contributions of the media in Ghana to the socio economic and political transformation cannot be over-emphasized. Ghana has made significant strides in its political dispensation partly because the media landscape has seen consistent progress over the last two decades. It is therefore not surprising that Ghana has been described as a beacon of democracy in Africa. It is therefore worth mentioning that Ghana has maintained its enviable reputation as the beacon of democracy in Africa and beyond.
However, careful studies of the media landscape seem to point to unfortunate attacks on journalists. The trend over the past decade is quite worrying and needs much attention. It is against this background that the “World Press Freedom Day” has become very significant to journalists in Ghana. Under the theme, 'Keeping Power in Check: Media, Justice and The Rule of Law,' this year’s celebration will focus on transparency of the political process, independence and media literacy of the judicial system and the accountability of state institutions towards the public.
Although Ghana can boast of considerable progress in press freedom, there are still some concerns when it comes to brutality and attacks on journalists, especially by some law enforcement agencies. The vicious and shameful attack on Ghanaian journalists is fast becoming the order of the day. Unfortunately, the Ghana Police Service has been cited for leading these attacks on the journalism profession. If pragmatic steps are taking to nip this canker in the bud, it will erode all the gains we have chalked as a nation with regards to press freedom.
Now, the alarming rate at which these attacks are carried out with impunity requires drastic measures. It’s high time we began calling a spade a spade, not a big spoon. Available statistics show that a total of one hundred and five (105) media practitioners (journalists) were subjected to physical assault in Ghana between January 2012 and July 2014 with about eight-five (85) out of the number sustaining various degrees of injuries.
On March 27, 2018, one of Ghana’s prolific journalists, Latif Iddris of the Multimedia Group Limited, was brutally beaten to near death at the headquarters of the Ghana Police Service. Indeed, this is not an isolated incident but rather it paints a gloomy picture of a tall list of 11 other incidents of attacks involving a total of 16 other journalists in Ghana in the last 15 months alone. Ironically, the leading perpetrators of attacks against journalists include the Ghana Police Service. Latif Idris’ attack, is a manifestation of the deteriorating conditions of safety of journalists in Ghana.
Several factors have been adduced by security experts as the cause of these wanton brutalities. Key among these include upsurge in the culture of impunity, poor or lack of safety training for journalists, lack of solidarity within the media enclave, among others.
Undoubtedly, the media landscape in Ghana is liberalized. Journalism has played significant roles in safeguarding Ghana's constitution and other democratic efforts. The repeal of the criminal libel law on Friday, 27 July 2001 brought more freedom to journalists but we have come to the crossroads where the nature of our political dispensation requires the passing of the much awaited “Right To Information Bill” (RTI) into Law.
Well-meaning Ghanaians including some non-governmental organizations have bemoaned the failure of successive governments to pass the 17-year-old Right To Information Bill, RTI into Law. Many believe that the RTI Bill, if passed, will give true meaning to the constitutional provision that guarantees freedom and independence of the media.
Though Ghana must be applauded for maintaining its democratic credentials since the inception of the 4th republic, I find it quite disturbing that governmental accountability, transparency and responsiveness have virtually remained highly insufficient. Public perception about corruption remains pervasive. Though I am of the opinion that the passing of the RTI bill into law is not the panacea to our fight against corruption, it will go a long way to empower journalists to demand transparency and accountability from authorities..
To this end, the security agencies must recognise the important role the media plays in the socio-economic development of every country and accord them the necessary respect they deserve. The Ghana Journalist Association (GJA) and the National Media Commission (NMC) must be seen playing the monitoring and advocacy roles in dealing with issues concerning journalists and also ensure higher level of professionalism among media houses.
Every year, May 3, is a day which celebrates the fundamental principles of press freedom, to evaluate press freedom around the world, to defend the media from attacks on their independence and to pay tribute to journalists who have lost their lives in the exercise of their profession. It serves as an occasion to inform citizens of violations of press freedom - a reminder that in dozens of countries around the world, publications are censored, fined, suspended and closed down, while journalists, editors and publishers are harassed, attacked, detained and even murdered. It is a date to encourage and develop initiatives in favour of press freedom, and to assess the state of press freedom worldwide.
Benjamin Osei Boateng (Bennymore)
Email: just4ben2000@yahoo.com"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"166"	2018-05-02	" On Thursday May 3, all roads and airspace lead to Ghana as journalists all over the world congregate in Accra to celebrate World Press Freedom Day.
 To host such an auspicious event is indeed a pat on the back for the significant progress we as a country and people have made in liberalising and empowering the media.
 But, the occasion compels us to reflect on the unusual blot to our free media and democratic credentials in terms of the 17-year delay in passing a Right to Information (RTI) law. After several broken promises to pass an RTI bill, the bill has now been gazetted and will be laid before Parliament soon with the strong expectation that it will be passed before the year is out.
 The RTI law comes in to provide the official framework to facilitate citizens’ requests and access to information, the scope for the minimum exemptions to information disclosure, and the right to appeal the application of such exemptions.
 Though citizens generally support an RTI law there are many people with limited knowledge about the RTI and unsure about its potential benefits to them. If an RTI regime is to succeed in Ghana then it is imperative that those leading the advocacy for the passage of the RTI bill, increase their efforts to educate, dispel myths and misinformation and equip citizens and decision makers with the knowledge to support the development of a well-functioning access to information regime in Ghana.Benefits of the RTI Law
 In 2017, the Auditor General, Mr. Domelevo released an audit report on the 2016 Liabilities of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs). The Auditor General following the audit rejected 46% of the total claims in the amount of 5.47billion Ghana Cedis ($1.2bn) more the $915m IMF package Ghana is currently accessing. The reasons for the disallowance, includes absence of relevant documents such as warrants, contracts documents, invoices and procurement records. The report also cited poor maintenance and double payment of claims.
 In essence, if the Auditor General was not diligent, these huge sums of money would be owed by the State and the government would have used the scarce resources from taxpayers to settle fictitious debts. The issue of records keeping in the public service is a major problem that needs to be fixed. This is where the RTI would be most valuable.
 Clauses 3 and 4 of the current RTI Bill 2018 obligates public institutions to compile and publish a manual on information they generate for access by the public. Not only does this ensure that proper records are kept, it will help improve the information management system of public institutions and bring it into the modern world.
 The media will also benefit immensely from the RTI law. For many investigative journalists who often have to use subterfuge to access information that ordinarily should be for public consumption, a framework for accessing information ensures that clear lines for the rules of engagement will be drawn to allow for easy access for journalists to do their work in fighting corruption, holding leaders to account and promoting development in the country.
 It is one of the reasons why Clause 2 of the RTI Bill 2018, obligates public institutions to voluntarily make information accessible without application from individuals. There are many other benefits in respect to managing public health like during an outbreak of contagious diseases, dealing with false news through social media and just day-to-day information about public service delivery to reduce facilitation payments.RTI Law: Why the fear
 Despite the obvious benefits of the RTI law, it has been 17 years with one broken promise after the other. One of the reasons for the delay in the passage of the RTI law is a fear held by the political class that this would give citizens, media and opponents unfettered access to misuse information, a fear that is unwarranted.
 An RTI framework is exactly the kind of institutional arrangement that ensures that a human right is not abused. In fact, a significant portion of the Bill is dedicated to the types of information exempted in the public interest subject to a harms test, i.e. that the benefits of disclosure outweigh the harm it will cause. Certainly, we feel some of the exemption should be made narrower still before it is even subjected to a harms test.
 Overall, however, most of these exemptions are consistent with good practices elsewhere. Moreover, the political class should remember that they are in office to serve the interest of the citizens who elected them and on whose behalf they are appointed to serve.
 They must also remember that they are citizens first and they would also need information when they finish their assignment. At the end, any citizen that stands against access to public information has something to hide and should not be countenanced.Implementation of the Law
 It is expected that by the end of the next sitting of Parliament or latest by the end of the year, Parliament would have passed the RTI Bill 2018 and it would have been assented to by the President to become law. The bigger challenge following the RTI law coming into force will be its successful implementation. Firstly, implementation of the RTI law can only be sustained where there is political will. This should be supported by public awareness creation and capacity building so that the RTI law does not join the unenviable ranks of impotent laws in Ghana.
 Implementation should also involve oversight and monitoring groups to whip up momentum for the working of the law and provide unbiased mechanisms for issues of compliance to ensure proper balance in the system like in the case of Mexico. Ghanaian citizens could particularly form groups and coalitions to monitor delivery of services and government policies, as achieved in Kenya, UK and India.
 Proactivity in disclosing information should also cover issues such as quality, access and utilization.Conclusion
 Without an RTI law, citizens cannot fully enjoy their inalienable rights to development and the optimum provision of services. Corruption will continue to be rife, resulting in a situation where only the elites in society can survive and thrive.
 After 17 years of toying with the idea of whether to pass or not to pass the RTI law, the time has come. Indeed, the time is now! Not the next election year or in another 16 years. When countries like Burkina Faso, Liberia and Cote d’Ivoire, besieged by political turmoil, instability and unrest has found the courage to pass RTI laws, Ghana literally has no valid excuse. Let us once again, show courage and leadership.
 #PassTheRTIBillNow"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"167"	2018-05-02	" Panelists at the World Freedom Day celebrations currently underway in Ghana have descended heavily on government for failing to attach seriousness to the passage of the RTI Bill.
 Nnenna Nwakanwa, a senior policy manager at World Wide Web Foundation, expressed her disappointment in government for doing more talk than action, in passing the bill.
 She noted, that a year was enough time for government to really show they were committed to the course by ensuring the passage of the RTI Bill.
 Her sharp criticism of government was triggered by pronouncements made by Information Minister, Mustapha Hamid, who told the gathering in his welcome speech that government was doing its best to ensure the passage of the RTI Bill which is currently in parliament.
 He revealed that work has started on the bill and is expected to be worked on when parliament resumes from its recess later in May.
 \"In Ghana, to further in our exercise to deepen democratic governance and empower citizen, we will pass the Right to Information Law. The right to Information bill which Ghana has been grappling with in the last 17years is currently before the representatives of the people, the parliament of the Republic of Ghana and we believe that when parliament comes into session this may, it will be debated and passed then Ghana will have the Right to Information Law.\"
 But the senior policy manager at World Wide Web Foundation reminded the Information Minister of a similar pronouncement the President, Nana Akufo-Addo made in 2017.
 \"Mr Minister, last year, at the Conference Center, Nana was there and he said that Ghana was on its way to adopting that law. It’s been one year now and it hasn't been done. Fulfil your promise. I will keep an eye and I hope by May, it will be done. The whole world is waiting for Ghana,\" she revealed.
 Also at the event, founder of the MFWA, Prof Karikari indicated that the lack of political will on the part of most governments in Africa towards promoting access to information and free speech is a major hindrance in that regard.
 Using Ghana as a case study, Professor Karikari stressed that the passage of the RTI isn't a priority for the political class of society.
 Prof Karikari thus said he isn't shocked that a country like Congo will have an RTI Bill and Ghana with all its democratic credentials will still be battling to pass theirs.
 \"In Africa here, the main obstacle to Press freedom is still political. There's been so much progress since 1993 but it also seems that most governments are reluctant to go the extra step of opening up more.\"
 \"An example is what you heard here this morning, a country like Ghana with all its credentials. What is holding us back from passing a law like Right to Information which even a country like Congo which is nowhere near democracy has passed.\"
 The RTI Bill has been on the drawing board for more than 17 years now after it was first drafted in 1999.
 It was laid in parliament in March before they went on recess.
 Ghana is the host for this years’ World Press Freedom Day which happens to be the 25th after its inception."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"168"	2018-05-01	" Information Minister, Mustapha Hamid has warned Ghanaian media against reckless reportage stressing that the impact could plunge the country into chaos.
 “On this day, take a second look at the power that you will and the responsibility you owe with a view to ensure that you do not sacrifice integrity and the future of our societies for today’s headlines and breaking news reference points,” he entreated Wednesday in his address at the opening ceremony of the world press freedom day 2018.
 Away from that, he said the Akufo-Addo government is “going to further deepen democratic governance and empower the citizens” with the passage of the Right to Information Bill into Law.
 It has been 22 years since the first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 Also, it is 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 The RTI Bill has finally been laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"169"	2018-04-26	"Parliament has again withdrawn the over a decade-old Right to Information Bill on the basis that it is “not urgent” in nature.
The contentious bill was last laid before Parliament on March 23 this year before the House went on recess amidst some procedural concerns raised by the minority leader Haruna Iddrisu.
At an emergency sitting Thursday to consider and ratify a number of bills, the House held that the bill, which was first drafted in 1999, was not urgent in nature, TV3’s Catherine Frimpomaa reported.
In making the decision to withdraw the bill Thursday night, the House took the view that it had not been gazetted, our parliamentary correspondent reported.
This means the bill will now be taken through the normal parliamentary procedure of gazetting and be considered after 14 days.
The joint Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs observed there were still some critical issues in the bill which required extensive consultations before it could be considered and passed by the House, our correspondent reported.
Right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
The passage of the RTI is expected to grant Ghanaians access to official information in the custody of public and private bodies performing functions that are funded by the taxpayer.Setbacks and broken promises
Drafted in 1999 under the auspices of the policy think-tank group, Institute of Economic Affairs, the bill was presented to parliament on February 5, 2010, after it received reviews in 2003, 2005 and 2007.
It has since faced a number of setbacks in the attempts to have it passed.
An attempt by Parliament in December 2016 to finally pass the bill, hit a snag as the minority members in the House raised red flag over aspects of the bill. They at the time proposed 24 amendments be made to the bill.
The apparent delays in the passage of the bill have widely been criticised by some anti-corruption crusaders who have pointed to lack of political will on the part of both the executive and parliament.
At Ghana’s 61st Independence Day celebration parade at the independence square in Accra, President Nana Akufo-Addo reaffirmed his government’s commitment to ensuring the passage of the bill before the March recess by the MPs.
“After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before Parliament rises,” he said.
But that also became another broken promise that has characterised the bill."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"170"	2018-04-04	" The Parliamentary Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is inviting memoranda and contributions to the Right to Information (RTI) Bill in order to build consensus and enhance its work.
 This comes on the heels of a 10-day ultimatum given to the government during a coordinated campaign for the speedy passage of the Bill by the Right to Information Coalition (RTIC). The campaign yielded some results as the bill was okayed by cabinet and sent to parliament.
 A release dated 4th April 2018 signed by Acting Director of the Public Affairs Department, Kate Addo, said that the RTI Bill was referred to the Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs during the first meeting of the second session of Parliament.
 The said memoranda are to be addressed to the committee and should reach Parliament not later than Friday 13th April 2018 via akua.parliament@gmail.com.
 The Right to Information Bill seeks to give right and access to official information held by public institutions and private entities which perform public functions with public funds. The Bill was introduced to parliament in 1999 under the former President, Jerry John Rawlings. The draft bill was reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"171"	2018-03-26	" Information Minister, Mustapha Hamid, has assured that the Right to Information (RTI) Bill will be passed into law by close of year 2018.
 Government came under massive pressure to get the bill laid following fears that the government was deliberately delaying the process.
 Deputy Attorney General, Joseph Kpemka Dindiok, finally laid it before Parliament, on Friday, March 23 2018. It comes after Cabinet on Thursday March 22, approved the bill paving the way for it to be laid before the lawmakers.
 It has been 22 years since the first Right to Information (RTI) Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 Also, it is 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 Speaking in Accra yesterday at a press launch as Ghana joined the rest of the world to celebrate World Press Freedom Day, Mr Hamid said all was in place to pass the bill by close of 2018.
 “We have shown our commitment in this past year that we have come into office with a commitment to pass the Right to Information Law,” he said, adding “the Right to Information bill is going to become law by the close of this year.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"172"	2018-03-25	"Information Minister, Mustapha Hamid has indicated that the Akufo-Addo-led government has shown great commitment to passing the Right To Information (RTI) Bill.  
The RTI Bill, which is expected to make information easily accessible by the media and Ghanaians to boost the fight against corruption, has been in legislation for well over 17 years now, because successive governments have failed to implement it despite several assurances.
It was first drafted 22 years ago under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA and was reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010  The NPP government has subsequently been under immense pressure from the media and some civil society organizations to get the bill passed within the shortest possible time since assuming office last year.   
But this according to Mustapha Hamid, was challenging as the bill had elapsed with the life of the “Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic” and was therefore mandatory to go through new procedures before being presented to parliament for approval.   
“In the past one year, we’ve done the necessary stakeholder consultation and taken it to Cabinet. Cabinet has done the extensive discussions and has approved it. Now it has been laid before Parliament” he stated.   
Some Ghanaians doubt it would be passed after the Minority Leader, Haruna Iddrisu on Friday, March 23, raised concerns with the fact the Bill has not been gazette, a situation he describes as “a breach of the standing orders of parliament.”  
Speaking at the launch of World Press Freedom Day, however, the Information Minister intimated that the RTI Bill will be passed into law before the year ends.  
\"The Right to Information Bill is going to become law before the close of this year. That makes our promise when we came into office that we were going to pass the bill a reality.\""	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"173"	2018-03-25	" Information minister, Mustapha Hamid, has assured that the Right to Information Bill will be passed into law by close of year 2018.
 Government came under massive pressure to get the bill laid following fears that the government was deliberately delaying the process.
 It was finally laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok Friday, March 23. It comes after Cabinet on Thursday, March 22, approved the bill paving the way for it to be laid before the lawmakers.
 It has been 22 years since the first Right to Information (RTI) Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 Also, it is 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 Speaking Monday, March 26 at a press launch as Ghana joined the rest of the world to celebrate World Press Freedom Day, Mr Hamid said all is in place to pass the bill by close of 2018.
 “We have shown our commitment in this past year that we have come into office with a commitment to pass the Right to Information Law,” he said, adding “the Right to Information bill is going to become law by the close of this year.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"174"	2018-03-24	"The founding president of policy think tank IMANI Africa, Franklin Cudjoe, has expressed his disappointment with the Akufo-Addo-led government for its quick ratification of the Ghana-US Military deal when the Right to Information Bill (RTI) is yet to be passed after close to 17 years.
The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognised as a right under International Conventions on Human rights. The bill will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society”.
The RTI bill was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament until 5 February 2010.
Mr Cudjoe is questioning why the RTI bill has not been passed despite several calls on government but the controversial defence deal between Ghana and USA had been ratified with “speed” although the agreement had not been exhaustively analysed.
Mr Cudjoe in a Facebook post said: “The US-Ghana Military base deal was passed by only the majority side in Parliament last night. The minority side walked out. There is very little evidence that the deal has been exhaustively analysed and further expansive concessions exacted from the Americans by the interior and defense ministries, judging from the near comical justifications made by the two in recent public discourse. What worries me greatly in all of the drama is the speed with which Parliament passed a deal that will be more beneficial to a foreign entity but has virtually abandoned the Right to Information bill for nearly 17 years. Well, I do hope the RTI bill will be treated with same bravado and speed to enable citizens demand many answers of the military deal. At this rate, we are mere robotic mortals at the feet of our political elites. I am highly disappointed!!”
The approval of the agreement was done by only the majority side of parliament with the minority staging a walkout.
As part of the agreement, the United States (US) government will be spending $20 million in training and supplying equipment for the Ghana Armed Forces (GAF), the US Embassy in Ghana, has said.
It also indicated that Ghana has also agreed to bear the cost and take primary responsibility for securing US military facilities in the country.
According to the contract, Ghana has granted US contractors tax exemption."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"175"	2018-03-23	"The two decades old Right To Information (RTI) Bill is likely to be laid in Parliament today, Friday, March 23, 2018, following Cabinet consideration Thursday night.
The passage of the Bill will, however, have to wait until at least June this year.
Civil Society Groups including the RTI coalition stepped up pressure after President Akufo Addo’s independence day speech in which he committed to have the Bill presented to Parliament before it rises today, Friday.
It has been 22 years since the first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
Also, it is 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
Government is under massive pressure to get the bill laid before parliament rises on Friday, March 23 following fears that the government was deliberately delaying the process.
“The Majority Leader, Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu expects the Communications Committee of Parliament to study and consult widely on the Bill during Parliament’s recess to enable speedy work when the House reconvenes in May.
“This is not a Bill that can be considered under a certificate of urgency and be completed in one day. So the import of introducing it in Parliament will be for the Committee to be seized of it so that they can take it home during the recess and do the necessary consultation and report back to us mid-May. So that when we come back mid-May into when we shall adjourn again which will be July ending, we would have dealt with it. 
” If the coast is clear sign is given, it will have to go to the Assembly press for gazetting, if it does go it can then come back to Parliament which is why I’m telling you it will come to Parliament in that state for it to be referred to the committee.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"176"	2018-03-23	"Folks, it is disgraceful that Alhaji Dr. Bawumia, Vice President, would make utterances that clearly portray him as an outsider in the government that he is part of. We know him as an unrepentant liar and fabricator, but we hardly expected him to make utterances that deepen his credibility crisis and make us wonder whether he is really part of the government or whether he really is an insider. 
Here are two major instances:
1. “CABINET APPROVES RTI BILL”
“The Vice President, Dr. Mahamadu Bawumia, has announced that a revised version of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill has been approved by Cabinet and forwarded to Parliament.
“Cabinet has given approval for the Right to Information Bill to be laid in Parliament for debate and approval because it is very critical that we pass the Right to Information Bill,” Dr. Bawumia stated during the Norway-Ghana Business and Investment Forum in Accra yesterday. 
(See https://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/Cabinet-approves-RTI-Bill-636118).
Public expectation was that this bill would be debated this week and ratified. All of a sudden, a different voice has come from the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and NPP Majority Leader in Parliament (Mensah Osei Kyei Bonsu):
“The Majority Leader and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu has told journalists Thursday that Cabinet was yet to approve the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
This contradicts claims by the Vice President, Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, that the bill had already received cabinet clearance and was subsequently forwarded to parliament for consideration.” 
(See https://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/Cabinet-yet-to-approve-RTI-Bill-Mensah-Bonsu-636939).
Meantime, a Ranking Member of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament (Alhaji Inusah Fuseini) revealed that Parliament would not be able to fulfill Akufo-Addo’s wish to have the Right to Information (RTI) bill passed before the house rises. Apparently, Akufo-Addo wasn’t properly informed before shooting his mouth on March 6 that all was set for the bill to be passed by March 23.
So, the dust has settled to expose Bawumia as ill-informed, uninformed, or ignorant of happenings within government circles. If Cabinet did approve that bill, was Bawumia part of the team? Is he not part of Cabinet? And for him to be contradicted by the majority Leader this way speaks volumes that Bawumia is an outsider in the very government that he tells tons of lies to prop up. A pitiful political neophyte he is!!
2. “570 DAMS TO BE BUILT THIS YEAR”	
Bawumia also shocked us by announcing that the government would build 570 dams this year when the government’s own budget and fiscal statement presented to parliament and Ghanaians made it explicitly clear that only 100 dams would be constructed as budgeted for. So, where at all is Bawumia positioned? Inside the inner circle or outside it?
3. SO-CALLED AILMENT AND TREATMENT IN LONDON
Let's place everything in the context of how Bawumia was reported to have fallen sick and was either confined to the Kanda residence or flown to London in secrecy.... and all the drama that unfolded thereafter for such useless gasbags like Gabby Otchere Darko to attempt adding value to him only to backfire. Too bad for him. Is Bawumiah really Ghana’s Vice President?
MY COMMENTS
Much is happening to prove that Bawumia is either walking on slippery grounds or is virtually being elbowed out. Otherwise, how could he not know better not to deceive himself and us that Cabinet had approved the RTI bill when, indeed, it wasn’t so? And how does he relate to the Ministers and Deputy Ministers below him in the pecking order so they don’t come out to make utterances that downgrade him (as Osei Mensah Kyei Bonsu has done)? And he hasn’t reacted so far to clear the air or claw back some lost grounds!!
As for the claim concerning 570 dams, we already know that Bawumia goofed. It is beyond argument that he has bitten off more than he can chew. He is still fixated on the “rally ground talk” that Justice Atuguba cautioned him against as far back as 2012 during the hearing of the NPP’s useless petition. Such an unrepentant liar continues to undercut himself and to make it difficult for him to aspire for anything higher than what he is now. 
In other words, the more Bawumia lies, the grimmer his chances of leading the NPP after Akufo-Addo becomes. Whatever is motivating him to continue telling damaging lies is best known to him and his handlers. As for me, I have already written him off as a pesky bug to be squashed if he ever shows up as a candidate at the polls. Lying here, lying there, isn’t the way to go; and he had better learn that lesson.
More importantly, as he continues to make public utterances to undermine his own integrity, the more he makes us wonder whether he is really a Vice president with authority to function as provided for by the Constitution of Ghana. We already know how the creation of the useless Ministry of Senior Minister, headed by Basket-Mouth Yaw Osafo-Marfo (which is even not recognized by Parliament to be given budgetary support) has overshadowed him. 
We also know of how Osafo-Marfo has moved fast to occupy the premises vacated by former President Mahama that had initially been set aside for Bawumia, implying that Bawumia has no official “locus” in the workings of the Asante-Akim Mafia. Just after Mahama left office, we were bombarded with news reports about the edifice being constructed for him (that he had led the NPP’s voracious gang to damn as too extravagant—and we haven’t heard anything about that project ever since, but we know that Bawumia is still occupying the Kanda residence that his father had acquired). 
Is that how to give status to the Vice President of Ghana? Or is it an adroit means to exploit the weaknesses in our Ghanaian system, assuming that he is paid rent allowance? Otherwise, what is being done to give him an official residence as done to all our former Vice Presidents? Again, isn’t it strange that government functionaries (Ministers/Deputy Ministers/Parliamentarians, Public officers in the Civil Service, etc.) would be given official residence (bungalows) while Bawumia is left to his fate to live in his father’s Kanda residence? What is happening here?
Folks, there is a lot to make us wonder a lot. Did Aliu Mahama live in a private residence? If not, why Bawumia? Something is not adding up properly here, which makes me wonder why Bawumia is still bent on running the fool’s errand that he has been given all these years. And in doing so, he is fast emerging as the fool who insists that his dead mother is not dead but sleeping, even when the stench and the buzzing of flies prove him otherwise. 
If it turns out to be that clandestine manouevres by the real insiders of the Akufo-Addo administration and the NPP machine have succeeded in implementing schemes to undermine and emasculate Bawumia as the Vice President, much concern should be aroused and expressed. What it means is that although Bawumia is in office as provided for by the Constitution, he lacks the clout to function. 
Many instances when he acted in the absence of Akufo-Addo could give us the inkling because he never issued any official statement to stamp his authority on the situation. Take, for instance, when Akufo-Addo left on a 10-day foreign trip and armed robbery spiked. Bawumia never acted decisively, which forced Akufo-Addo to cut short his trip and return home to make moves for tackling the menace. 
In this sense, one can see Bawumia as ineffectual, ineffective, and grossly handicapped. Why couldn’t he make any decisive move as the Acting president to attempt solving the problem? And when Akufo-Addo returned, Bawumia faded, turning attention to ceremonial events. Such a weakling isn’t productive. That is why all the ugly noise he makes in carrying out the fool’s errand irritates.  
Ghanaian politics is, indeed, dirty and full of nonsense. But can those who claim to be COMPETENT and Ghana’s “interrectuals” not give us anything about it to respect? Just consider how they are trying desperately to equalize their mis-steps regarding the obnoxious agreement with the United States, blaming everything on the NDC (citing previous agreements signed in 1998 under Rawlings and 2015 under Mahama, which the NDC has debunked). Can’t these “interrectuals” prove their worth for once? I wonder; I truly wonder.  
I shall return…
•E-mail: mjbokor@yahoo.com
•Join me on Facebook at: http://www.facebook.com/mjkbokor"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"177"	2018-03-23	"The Right to Information Bill has finally been laid before Parliament by the Deputy Attorney General Joseph Kpemka Dindiok.
President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo had announced while addressing the March 6 Independence Day parade that the Bill will be laid and passed before the lawmaking body rises.
It is, however, unlikely that the bill will be passed before the House rises today as promised by the President.
According to Starr FM’s Parliamentary Correspondent, Ibrahim Alhassan, the bill has been referred to the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and the Communications committee of Parliament.
This development comes after Cabinet on Thursday approved the bill paving the way for it to be laid before the lawmakers.
Government came under massive pressure to get the bill laid following fears that the government was deliberately delaying the process.
It has been 22 years since the first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
Also, it is 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill.
The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
The Minority Leader, Haruna Iddrisu, however, raised procedural issues and breach of the constitution given that the bill was laid without gazetting.
But his position was dismissed by the majority leader Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu who argued that if the two committees determine that the bill is of urgent nature then there will be no requirement for a gazette."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"178"	2018-03-23	"Stories making headlines on the front pages in the major newspapers include: Daily Graphic: 
- 272 Financial institutions in distress
- Withdraw defence cooperation agreement - NDC
- Agyepong proposes bins for households to improve sanitation
- Businesses laud govt for suspension or VAT, levies
- Govt releases $100m for reconstruction of Kumasi Central Market
- Masterplan for WASH programme for Asutifi North District launchedDaily Guide:
- Amidu fires NDC over corruption fight
-  Cut down killer rent - Greenstreet begs Nana
- Mahama still cries over defeat
-  Ayariga sues govt over projectsThe Chronicle:
- After the chronicle expose'..9 Ejisuman SHS tutors interdicted over bonking of students story
- TMA denies 10% kickback charge against MCE
-  Grumbling in GRA over intended paramilitary statusGhanaian Times:
- 20 drug peddlers arrested in Accra 
- RTI bill to be laid before House today 
- Dismiss Ayine's case against me - Martin Amidu 
- NDC vows to suspend military agreement if... The Daily Statesman:
 - Opuni faces more charges over Cocoa roads ‘chop-chop’
- Govt suspends import VAT on 64 commodity groups 
- Parliament approves GH¢1.8bn for DACFDaily Heritage:
- GNPC again? Earmarks $30m to build 2 offices after spending $650M on none-core areas 
-  CJ begs judges over strike, meets govt on March 28 
- US Military Saga, Ayariga flays govt 
- MTN makes progress in financial inclusion, digital servicesThe Mirror:
- Women put careers ahead of childbirth 
- Chainsaw operators invade royal cemetery
- Tragic! 2 siblings drown in streamNew Weekend Crusading Guide:
- NDC Gov't will suspend U.S, Ghana military deal... But Ambassador says troops won't be 'permanently' based here 
- JAK speaks on 'Sustainable business and responsible investments'The Inquisitor:
- Powerful NPP forces at play: NPA, BOST bosses targetted - Detractors not getting attention of President, Veep 
- Duffour's IFS fails uniBank upon all-knowing attitudeThe Daily Statesman:
 - Opuni faces more charges over Cocoa roads ‘chop-chop’
- Govt suspends import VAT on 64 commodity groups 
- Parliament approves GH¢1.8bn for DACFGhanaian Observer:
- Mahama attacks media over 2016 election defeat 
- NDC fights NPP over US military deal 
- US defense deal 'not an invasion' - US Ambassador The Informer: 
- On establishment of US military base in Ghana - Nitiwul embarrasses government, army 
- Ignore propaganda against TMA boss, Akufo-Addo advisedThe Publisher:
- MPs split over uniBank takeover 
- Mob kill mobile money robber  
- Judges suspend strike 
- Government halts levies on 64 commodities Goldstreet Business:
-  New terminal 3 to handle 1,250 passengers per hour
- Policy guide for moving “Ghana beyond Aid” is well targeted- Prof Adei
- Cyber-attacks targeting online banking rises...fight of threat sole responsibility of banks - BoGDaily Heritage Sports:
- Bale breaks Wales goalscoring record
- Sanchez desires better performance at Man United 
- Pique teases Madrid on WhatsAppWeekend Today:
- Atiwa citizens walk 95km to protest bauxite mining 
- Estates company chases contractor"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"179"	2018-03-22	" The Majority Leader and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu has told journalists Thursday that Cabinet was yet to approve the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
 This contradicts claims by the Vice President, Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, that the bill had already received cabinet clearance and was subsequently forwarded to parliament for consideration.
 It has been 22 years since the first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 Also, it is 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 Government is under massive pressure to get the bill laid before parliament rises on Friday March 23 following fears that the government was deliberately delaying the process.
 “Cabinet has given approval to the Right to Information Bill to be laid in parliament for debate and approval because it is very very critical that we pass the Right to Information Bill and it is our hope that it will add additional feather in our fight against corruption,” said Dr. Bawumia on Monday March 19 during his address at the Norway-Ghana Business and Investment Forum and official launch of the Norfund’s West Africa Office in Ghana.
 But speaking to journalists on the matter, Mr. Mensah-Bonsu said: “The cabinet is meeting today [Thursday, March 22, 2018] on that.”
 According to him, a cabinet sub-committee has already looked at the bill and that it would likely receive the approval at Thursday’s cabinet meeting."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"180"	2018-03-22	" Member of Parliament [MP] for Manhyia North constituency, Collins Owusu Amankwah says President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo cannot be blamed for the delay in the passage into law the Right To Information (RTI) Bill.
 According to him issues of National  Security are very critical cases that need to be well looked into and drafted before made public for use.
 “This will protect the affairs of the state as well as citizens, since not all information of the state have to be made public”, he said.
 Speaking on UTV’s ‘Adekye Nsroma’ programme, Collins Owusu Amankwah indicated that cabinet has endorsed the RTI Bill and have expressed optimism for it to be laid before parliament for passage, but this does not give a hundred percent [100%] assurance that parliament will at all cost pass it into law or accept exactly what cabinet have sent to the house.
 “We will send it back to cabinet for redress should we find a fault with the document sent to us. Our motive is to do an excellent work as we protect the image of our country, therefore we cannot be forced to accept a document we are not satisfied with per the laws binding the House”, he told Tweneboah Kodua  host of the show.
 The Manhyia North MP advised members of the largest opposition party [NDC] not to deliberately think they can put pressure on the government to do a shoddy job.
 “They should exercise patience and watch us in action do what they couldn’t do when they had the baton to act”, he added."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"181"	2018-03-22	" The Right To Information Bill should have been passed into law a long time ago, former Attorney General Dr Yao Obed Asamoah has said.
 The Bill, when passed, will enable citizens have access to information regarding public institutions as well as private institutions that do business of any sort with government institutions.
 This year marks 22 years since the first RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 It also marks 16 years since the executive arm of government, in 2002, drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid before Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 President Nana Akufo-Addo recently said at the 61st Independence anniversary on 6 March that he will ensure the current meeting of parliament, which is billed to rise on Friday, 23 March, passes the bill.
 The bill has been sent to parliament after Cabinet approved it, but with just two days to the rising of parliament, it is still unclear if the president’s promise would be fulfilled.
 Private legal practitioner Samson Lardy Anyenini is currently leading the Action Campaign Group to mount pressure on the executive and legislature to pass the Bill.
 Speaking on the delayed passage of the bill, Dr Asamoah told Accra-based Starr FM on Wednesday that: “I really quite frankly don’t understand why it’s taking so long to pass this bill, we should have passed it by now”.
 The former Chairman of the National Democratic Congress (NDC) surmised that the bill’s passage has been stuck in the works due to apprehension by politicians that its usage could hurt them.
 “…I think some governments are sort of scared of the situation whereby people can be passing information which you cannot stop. Because once you have that the average citizen will be entitled to certain types of information within the government machinery. It’s not just the NDC, for example, that has been reluctant to pass it, the NPP has been reluctant to pass it, too, but I hear now they’ve sent the bill to parliament – the cabinet-approved version has gone to parliament – and they want to pass the bill before parliament rises, but parliament is supposed to be rising on the 23rd, I don’t see how they can do that, so maybe they are not being sincere”, he said."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"182"	2018-03-22	" The Right to Information Coalition and Action Campaign Group is mounting pressure on government to, at least, lay the RTI Bill in Parliament before the House rises on Friday, March 23, 2018.
 President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo announced while addressing the March 6 Independence Day parade that the Bill will be laid and passed before the lawmaking body rises. On Monday, Vice President Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia revealed cabinet has approved and forwarded a revised version of the RTI Bill to parliament for consideration.
 “Cabinet has given approval to the Right to Information Bill to be laid in parliament for debate and approval because it is very critical that we pass the Right to Information Bill and it is our hope that it will add additional feather in our fight against corruption,” he stated.
 On the eve of Parliament’s recess, the Coalition said: “While we accept that the Bill cannot be passed immediately, at the minimum we expect the bill to be laid in Parliament before it goes on recess, tomorrow.”Below is the full statement from the Coalition
 THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) ACTION CAMPAIGN GROUP
 Today is DAY 9 of the 10-day Countdown that was initiated as part of the coordinated Campaign for the speedy passage of the RTI Bill into law in 2018. By this statement, the RTI Coalition and the RTI Action Campaign Group is reminding H.E President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo of his 6th March pledge to have the near two decades old RTI Bill laid and passed before Parliament rises.
 Parliament goes on recess tomorrow March 23, 2018. While we accept that the Bill cannot be passed immediately, at the minimum we expect the bill to be laid in Parliament before it goes on recess, tomorrow.
 We are united in our belief that passage of the RTI Bill is necessary to make credible and effective existing anticorruption legislation, including the Office of the Special Prosecutor Act and the Whistleblower Act. Similarly, we are confident the passage of the RTI Bill will help address the public financial management and institutional weaknesses noted in the recently concluded Auditor General report on the liabilities of Ministries, Department and Agencies ending 31st December 2016. It is in the interest of the citizens of Ghana and for the urgent need to give meaning to the article 21 “Right to Information” and the article 41 citizens duty “to protect and preserve public property and expose and combat misuse and waste of public funds and property”, for him to keep this promise.
 We are unable to find any reasonable justification for the continued inaction on the RTI Bill and hereby call on H.E. President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo and his government, to ensure that the RTI Bill, is laid in Parliament tomorrow. The time for talking is over. If we mean business, then we must act.
 The RTI Coalition and the RTI Action Campaign Group calls on the media fraternity to continue with their support of this campaign and on citizens to join the campaign for the passage of the RTI Bill."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"183"	2018-03-22	"The Right to Information (RTI) Action Campaign Group has charged President Nana Akufo-Addo to redeem his March 6 pledge of laying the RTI bill in parliament before parliamentarians go on recess on March 23, 2018.
In a statement copied to GhanaWeb, the group states that while they accept that the Bill cannot be passed immediately they expect the bill to be laid in parliament before it goes on recess. 
President Nana Akufo-Addo gave the strongest assurance that his government will take the necessary steps that will lead to the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
Addressing the 61st Independence Day parade in Accra on Tuesday, March 6, the president hinted that in addition to the creation of the Special Prosecutor’s office, his government will champion the passage of the Right to Information bill.
“There is, however, one piece of the anti-corruption framework that is yet to be put in place; The Right to Information Act. It would increase transparency and add another critical weapon to the armoury in the fight against corruption,” he stated.
“After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before Parliament rises,” he added.
“Fellow Ghanaians, corruption, or, more specifically, the stealing of public funds, continues to hold back the development of our nation.  Corruption is not a partisan matter and we must all act to protect the public purse”, he noted.
This the RTI Action Campaign Group believe “that passage of the RTI Bill is necessary to make credible and effective existing anticorruption legislation, including the Office of the Special Prosecutor Act and the Whistleblower Act. 
Similarly, we are confident the passage of the RTI Bill will help address the public financial management and institutional weaknesses noted in the recently concluded Auditor General report on the liabilities of Ministries, Department and Agencies ending 31st December 2016.”Read full statement belowTHE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) ACTION CAMPAIGN GROUP 
Today is DAY 9 of the 10-day Countdown that was initiated as part of the coordinated Campaign for the speedy passage of the RTI Bill into law in 2018. 
By this statement, the RTI Coalition and the RTI Action Campaign Group is reminding H.E President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo of his 6th March pledge to have the near two decades old RTI Bill laid and passed before Parliament rises. Parliament goes on recess tomorrow March 23, 2018. While we accept that the Bill cannot be passed immediately, at the minimum we expect the bill to be laid in Parliament before it goes on recess, tomorrow. 
We are united in our belief that passage of the RTI Bill is necessary to make credible and effective existing anticorruption legislation, including the Office of the Special Prosecutor Act and the Whistleblower Act. 
Similarly, we are confident the passage of the RTI Bill will help address the public financial management and institutional weaknesses noted in the recently concluded Auditor General report on the liabilities of Ministries, Department and Agencies ending 31st December 2016. 
It is in the interest of the citizens of Ghana and for the urgent need to give meaning to the article 21 “Right to Information” and the article 41 citizens duty “to protect and preserve public property and expose and combat misuse and waste of public funds and property”, for him to keep this promise. 
We are unable to find any reasonable justification for the continued inaction on the RTI Bill and hereby call on H.E. President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo and his government, to ensure that the RTI Bill, is laid in Parliament tomorrow. The time for talking is over. If we mean business, then we must act. 
The RTI Coalition and the RTI Action Campaign Group calls on the media fraternity to continue with their support of this campaign and on citizens to join the campaign for the passage of the RTI Bill. 
God Bless Ghana! 
Thank you."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"184"	2018-03-22	"Dear Mr President,
I know and I can attest to the fact that you have done significant amount of work in just a year and quarter months to set the right foundation for much needed Change Ghanaians voted for.
Your restoration of the scrapped teacher and nursing trainees allowance by the NDC government, introduction of the paperless port transactions which has made port revenue goes up by 56%, the national digital property address system and the most messiah one is the introduction of free senior high school which had increase the enrollment by over 90000 Ghanaian children, etc. have made me believe in your competency.
Just one quarter year of discharging your duty has proven beyond doubt that you are a selfless leader always ready in your last effort to make Ghana work again.
Your creation of the office of a special prosecutor by nominating a member from the opposition party to be entrusted with the prosecutorial power to prosecute corrupt officials in both current and past government means you really mean business in the fight against corruption.
Mr. President, I can assure you that, the passage of the RTI bill into law would be one of the powerful weapons with a double edged sword which can Pearce the heart of corruption in our beloved country.
Without the passage of the RTI bill, the office of the Special Prosecutor will be less meaningful as the process of acquiring information would be impaired or difficult.
This is a bill that has being laid before parliament for more than 17years during the leadership of four different Democratically elected president from both NPP and NDC under this fourth republic but  yielded no fruit.
18 years of being laid before parliament if it was to be human as we are, by the time of parliamentary exposure, it would have being qualified to votes and decide on her own.
Mr. President, I don't want to believe that your predecessors refused to be committed for the passage of the RTI bill because certain hidden facts in the executive arm that were tantamount to corruption would have being revealed in the discharge of their duty as an executive heads in government.
In the case of the legislative, the likes of Hon. Joe Osei Owusu has proven beyond doubt that, the delay in the passage of the bill for almost 18 years was a deliberate attempt.
If a well-respected and experience member of parliament who was pushing for the passage of the bill into law when he was in opposition could say the passage of the bill is no longer a pressing issue as far as he is concern because there are other pressing bills before parliament that need to be passed into law, then it should signal you how hypocritical some parliamentarians are (both NPP and NDC).
This was the same man that criticized the John Mahama government that, if it is committed, the passage of the bill can be realized before the end of 2016 during an interview he granted to joy news on May 3rd, 2016.
He even urged Ghanaians to be insisting on the passage of the RTI bill because we have a right to information.
Let Hon. Joe Osei Owusu bring out the bills laid before parliament that are yet to be passed into law for Ghanaians to put them into priority and let's see where the RTI bill would be.
Mr. President, I will also encourage you to make the speaker of parliament Rt Hon. professor Aaron Mike Oqyaye's view concerning the RTI bill to have its way in the passage. As he said, \"the RTI bill will be more meaningful if it goes beyond dealing with the public sector to include the private sector.
Yes I have 100% bought his idea because, many government officials work in connection with private sectors to create,loot state confers and share especially in the case of awarding contracts, causing financial loss to the state.
Also the passage of the RTI bill into law will make sure that, the work of the media being the fourth estate of realm in terms of the country's governance system which include investigative, analytical and popular journalism would be easily accessible.
No longer will the media and the public at large will be depending on conjecture, rumors, leaks and sources other than knowledgeable sources.
Mr. President if you want to ensure effective delivery of service to Ghanaians through the promotion of accountability, probity, transparency in the public, professional, economic, social and personal sphere, then you must be fully committed to the passage of the RTI bill into law as you promised in your manifesto during the 2016 electioneering campaign.
Mr. President, I hope to have no doubt that your commitment to ensure the passage of the RTI bill into law as was enshrined in your 2016 electioneering campaign manifesto would be realized as fulfilled promise before the end of this year 2018.
I hope my say will have its way.
I am a citizen not a spectator
 Thank you
Ofori Gyan Mebro Albert"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"185"	2018-03-20	"The Vice President, Dr Mahamadu Bawumia, has announced that a revised version of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill has been approved by Cabinet and forwarded to Parliament.
“Cabinet has given approval for the Right to Information Bill to be laid in Parliament for debate and approval because it is very critical that we pass the Right to Information Bill,” Dr Bawumia stated during the Norway-Ghana Business and Investment Forum in Accra yesterday.
Attorney-General, Gloria Akuffo and Majority Leader, Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu, are said to be pushing for the Bill to be laid before the House rises on Friday, March 23.
The RTI Bill, which is expected to help in the fight against corruption, has been in and out of parliament for the past 15 years since it was first laid in 2003.
The vice president’s statement comes after increased agitations from civil society groups like the Right to Information Coalition, that have called for the passage of the Bill before parliament rises on Friday.
The Vice President said the Bill, if approved, will go a long way to boost the fight against corruption and strengthen investor confidence in Ghana.
“It is our hope that this will be an additional feather in our cap in the fight against corruption,” he said.
“Ghana has taken cognizance of the mistakes of others. Since coming into office, President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo has deployed some bold initiatives aimed at curbing the corruption menace in order to assure the investing public of the safety of their investments,” he told the audience at the Norway-Ghana Business and Investment Forum.
During the country’s 61st Independence Anniversary last two weeks, the President gave assurance that he would facilitate the laying of the Bill in parliament before the House rises.
He, however, is under pressure from civil society groups, with only five days left for the legislators to rise.
A group of campaigners on Monday hit the streets of Accra, distributing flyers to push for the Bill to be laid before Parliament after mounting pressure on the government."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"186"	2018-03-20	" Chairman of the Subsidiary Legislation Committee of Parliament, Mahama Ayariga, has posited that, there is nothing to celebrate about cabinet's approval given to the Right to Information Bill (RTI).
 The MP for Bawku Central told Rainbow Radio’s Kwabena Agyapong that, the key thing is to commit to the passage of the bill.
 He also noted that the passage of the bill will be possible for passage by parliament in 4 four days under a certificate of urgency if indeed President Nana Akufo-Addo, is committed to ensuring the bill is passed into law before Parliament rises.
 He stressed that, parliament can pass the legislation under a certificate of urgency. It is possible. They should show enough commitment.''
 He was however quick to warn that, should the amended bill fail to address corruption and help fight it, then the bill, will be meaningless.
 Vice President Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia has announced that cabinet has approved an amended RTI bill and has forwarded same to parliament for passage.
 Speaking at the Norway-Ghana Business and Investment Forum in Accra on Monday, the second gentleman of the land added ‘’it is our hope that this will be an additional feather in our cup in the fight against corruption.’’
 ‘’Ghana has taken cognizance of the mistakes of others. Since coming into office, President Akufo-Addo has deployed some bold initiatives aimed at curbing the corruption menace in order to assure the investing public of the safety of their investments.’’
 Meanwhile, the Speaker of Parliament is advocating for the bill to consider the private sector.
 Commenting on that, the legislator wondered why the private sector should be forced to disclose information about their businesses.
 He said, what we are entitled to as citizens is about public information and not private.
 ‘’We are entitled to information on what our tax payers money is used for and not what a private businessman does,’’ he said.
 He also added that if government should award a contract to a private individual, Ghanaians should be able to have details about the number of beneficiaries of the contract."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"187"	2018-03-20	"A Ranking Member of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament, Alhaji Inusah Fuseini says parliament would not be able to fulfil the president’s wish to have the Right to Information (RTI) bill passed before the house rises.
According to the Vice President Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, cabinet has given approval for the bill to be laid and passed by parliament.
At the Independence parade on March 6, President Akufo-Addo was upbeat about getting the almost two decades old bill passed in March.
“After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before Parliament rises,” he stated.
But the Member of Parliament for Tamale Central, Inusah Fuseini told TV3 the president was not well-informed when he made that promise.
The house is expected to rise for the Easter break on Friday, March 23.
“I think that the president was not adequately informed of the calendar of parliament, that is why on 6th March he said that we will pass it in this sitting, we can’t pass it in this sitting,” he asserted.
“I have had discussions with the chairman [of the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee], we have agreed that when the bill is laid, we will take it through the same procedure that we took the office of the special prosecutor bill through.”
He explained that there will be a stakeholder engagement for two days in parliament to be followed by a two-day “consideration, clause by clause” at another venue probably outside the national capital, Accra.
“If it is laid before we rise, by the time we come back, the report will be ready. We are prepared to work during this break to ensure that the bill is ready.”
The RTI Bill is expected to make information easily accessible by the media and Ghanaians to boost the fight against corruption. The bill has been in and out of Parliament since 2003, because successive governments have failed to pass it into law.
Meanwhile, Dr. Rasheed Draman, Executive Director, African Centre for Parliamentary Affairs (ACEPA) is cautioning that  the RTI is “not an ordinary bill to be rushed through.”
He, therefore, urged stakeholders to thoroughly go through the bill before it is passed by parliament."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"188"	2018-03-20	" Stories making headlines on the front pages in the major newspapers include:Daily Graphic:
 - Atiwa residents walk to Flagstaff House against bauxite mining
 - Akakpokope food poison findings referred to Police
 - COPEC petitions special prosecutor.. It wants 1.8 million crude oil sale by BOST investigatedDaily Guide:
 - Cocobod nails Opuni over fake fertilizer
 - One village, one dam kicks off
 - CID chases fake Zehn security boss
 - One killed in renewed clashes at Ahwiaa
 - Cabinet approves RTI BillThe New Crusading Guide:
 - Don't defend Opuni... NDC Group tells members
 - COPEC drags BOST to special prosecutor over financial loss allegations
 - Fingers behind Ghana's Crude Oil
 - Keep the faith...President assures Dorimon EldersThe Chronicle:
 - Kids boycott death-trap school.. Sefwi Wiawso Assembly turns deaf ear in spite of 5 years of constant reminder
 - Police arrest teacher for brutalising sonToday:
 - Cabinet okays RTI Bill for parliament
 - PPP man donates to inmates at Kete-Krachi prisons on 40th B'day
 - DCE, Computer man fight over community center project
 - Ministers break silence on Ga Paramount Chieftaincy disputeDaily Heritage:
 - Stroke alert even 30-year-olds at high risk, poor lifestyle major threat
 - Comet to pay GH¢18,500 compensation to Mallam Market salt traders
 - Another Ponzi scheme hits Ghana as scores lose millions to Savanna Brokerage
 - COPEC runs to Special Prosecutor over transactions of BOSTDaily Statesman:
 - War against corruption - Cabinet okays RTI Bill
 - Stop defending Opuni and co - NDC groups caution leaders
 - Cape Coast assembly set for decongestion exerciseB&FT
 - Doubling GDP per capita in 6yrs unrealistic - World Bank
 - Free Zones Authority strategises to serve industry better
 - Oil, service based growth perpetuating poverty - WB Report
 - Campaign to get consumer protection law passed gathers momentum
 - GN Bank to meet GH¢400M capital by Q3
 - President to address business leaders at UK-Ghana investment summitGraphic Showbiz:
 - Zylofon unfair to us - underground act Bra Obofour
 - VGMA new artiste of the year winners over the yearsDay Break:
 - GPHA , Police nab oil pirates
 - Ofori-Atta launches TREE project to support govt's ' Ghana Beyond Aid' agenda
 - Use youth bravery to build and defend peace - Vice PresidentGhanaian Times
 - Declare Montie 3 pardon null and void.. Supreme Court hears case today
 - Ahwiaa youth in bloody clash again ! One dead , school closed down
 - Armed men abduct 4 children at  Asutsuari
 - NIB launches 55th anniversary celebrations
 - Ghana, Qatar hold bilateral meeting in Accra
 - Govt urged to halt fumigation at Tema PortABC News:
 - Agricult Lithovit fertilizer tainted - Standard Authority revealsThe Custodian:
 - Cabinet has approved RTI Bill to fight corruption, says Bawumia
 - Akufo-Addo rallies national support for Free SHS
 - Use condoms to prevent pregnancies, MPs tell teenagers
 - We are not your kids - De Sooso tells JJ
 - Joe Wise builds ultramodern edifice for Bekwai Polic"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"189"	2018-03-19	" Cabinet has given approval for the Right to Information Bill to be laid in Parliament for debate and approval, the Vice President of the Republic, H.E. Dr Mahamudu Bawumia, has announced.
 The Bill, which has been on the drawing board for the past 17 years, is set to receive a parliamentary attention as soon as possible and will greatly aid in the fight against corruption, according to Dr Bawumia.
 Speaking at the opening session of the Norway-Ghana Business and Investment Forum in Accra on Monday March 19th, 2018, Vice President Bawumia deplored the debilitating effects of corruption, especially in developing countries, and outlined a number of measures the Nana Akufo-Addo Government is putting in place to combat the menace.
 “For many countries including Ghana, corruption has become a curse that afflicts many. In fact, it is said that the worst disease in the world today is corruption. And there is a cure: transparency and accountability. Between the rise and fall of many nations is the bridge called corruption. Ghana has taken cognizance of the mistakes of others.
 “Since coming into office, President Akufo-Addo has deployed some bold initiatives at curbing the corruption menace in order to assure the investing public of the safety of their investments.
 “The establishment of the Office of the Special Prosecutor backed by an act of Parliament says it all. This month also, cabinet has given approval for the Right to Information Bill to be laid in parliament for debate and approval. It is our hope that this will be an additional feather in our cup in the fight against corruption.”
 The oil and gas sector, which is also amenable to corruption, is also receiving serious scrutiny.
 “One major milestone we have reached in the fight against corruption as a government is transparency in terms of good governance. In the oil and gas sector, for instance, government has launched The Ghana Petroleum Register in February this year. The register contains petroleum agreements and permits which have been published online.
 “All 17 active Petroleum Agreements have been published. This makes Ghana one of the leading examples in Africa in resource contract transparency. It is also a demonstration by the President to fight corruption in the oil and gas industry.”
 In another development, the West African Office for the Norwegian Investment Fund for Developing Countries (Norfund), Norway’s Development Finance Institution, has been established in Accra. In many countries, Norfund has facilitated economic growth and poverty reduction by investing risk capital in profitable businesses.
 The Norwegian Minister of International Development, Mr Nicolai Astrup, officially opened the Ghana office on the 19th of March 2018."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"190"	2018-03-19	" The Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia, has revealed that Cabinet has already endorsed the Right to Information (RTI) Bill and expressed optimism that it will soon be laid before parliament for passage.
 “Just a couple of weeks ago, Cabinet has given approval to the Right to Information (RTI) Bill to be laid in parliament for debate and approval because it is very critical that we pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill,” he said in an address at the Norway Ghana Business Forum in Accra.
 Dr Bawumia added that “it is our hope that this will be an additional feather in our cap to the fight against corruption”.
 His comments come in the wake of mounted pressure on parliament to ensure that the bill is passed before parliament rises.
 2018 marks 22 years since the first RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 It also marks 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid before Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo revealed government’s commitment to the passage of the bill in his speech at Ghana’s 61st independence celebration.
 “After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before Parliament rises,” he said.
 After several calls for parliament to follow through and pass the bill, first Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Joseph Osei Owusu, said no pressure group can threaten Parliament to pass the bill into law.
 But Private legal practitioner, Samson Lardy Anyenini, is urging legislators to get to work and stop the rhetoric and has indicated that no group has issued threats against President Nana Akufo-Addo or parliament over the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
 Mr Anyenini, a member of the Action Campaign Group, further urged legislators to be focused and ensure that the bill is laid before parliament rises on Friday, March 23.
 “No group is threatening parliament, no group threatened the president to make the declaration on the 6th of March that the bill will be laid and passed before they rise. They are rising on Friday; we have said that we know the President’s promise was not realistic but at the minimum we should have the bill in parliament,” he told Moro Awudu on Monday 19 March 2018.
 For him, “there is no bill that has been worked on thoroughly like this one” in order to empower ordinary citizens.
 He said the bill is for the public but journalists find themselves in positions where they will use it a lot more but “it is not for journalists”.
 He maintained that public information is not a private property for anyone to hoard.
 “The president knew what he was doing before he made the promise because he knew the bill was ready, what is the problem now?” he questioned.
 He stated that the president must redeem his image and ensure that the bill is passed."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"191"	2018-03-19	" The absence of a Right To Information (RTI) law in Ghana is not a problem in the country but rather access to the gazette containing public sector information is the main issue Ghanaians must deal with, Professor Kwaku Asare, a United States-based Ghanaian professor, has said.
 According to him, efforts must be channeled to the bottlenecks that are associated with accessing the gazette, which is the storeroom of public sector information.
 His comment comes on the heels of pressure on government by the RTI focused group, Action Campaign Group, to ensure the passage of the RTI bill by Friday, 23 March 2018 before Parliament rises on that day.
 The group’s action followed assurances given by President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo that government was committed to the passage of the bill in his speech at Ghana’s 61st independence celebration.
 “After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before Parliament rises,” the president said.
 However, commenting on this development in a Facebook post, Prof Asare said: “The problem is not a right to information. The problem is access to the gazette, which is supposed to be a data warehouse of public sector information.
 “The solution therefore is an amendment to existing laws to provide that ‘Where any law provides that any rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notification or any other matter shall be published in the Official Gazette, then, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such rule, regulation, order, bye-law, notification or any other matter is published in the Electronic Gazette.’
 “Concurrently, the ministry of telecommunications must be resourced to invest in functional state of the art data storage and management system to host the gazette. So I am for eGazette!”
 Meanwhile, the Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia, has revealed that Cabinet has already endorsed the RTI Bill and expressed optimism that it will soon be laid before parliament for passage.
 “Just a couple of weeks ago, Cabinet has given approval to the Right to Information (RTI) Bill to be laid in parliament for debate and approval because it is very critical that we pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill,” he said in an address at the Norway Ghana Business Forum in Accra.
 Dr Bawumia added that “it is our hope that this will be an additional feather in our cap to the fight against corruption”."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"192"	2018-03-19	"Although President Akuffo Addo has indicated that the Right to Information Bill will be passed before Parliament rises on Friday, this is not likely to happen.
Available information to Radio Ghana indicates the Bill is not in the current \"line up\" for the week.
Meanwhile, Acting Public Affairs Director of Parliament, Kate Addo has been explaining to Radio Ghana why the Right to Information Bill \"may\" or \"may not\" be passed before Parliament rises on Friday.
She said, current discussions on the RTI Bill are all conjectures. What citizens need to do, is to be patient because both the Executive and Legislature are committed to the passage of the Bill when it is laid before the House.
A member of the RTI Action Campaign Group, Samson Lardi Ayenini has expressed disappointment at the delay in the passage of the Bill. He disagrees with the Speaker of Parliament's claim that the Bill has some loopholes.
He said the Bill, defines how information can be accessed from public and private institutions which do business with State Agencies.
Speaking to Radio Ghana's Felix Cofie, Mr. Ayenini said the President's statement on the eve of the Independence Anniversary that he is going to add meaning to Ghana's freedom by getting the Bill passed, has put his integrity on the line.
Mr. Ayenini said the Bill is not only to empower the media, but ensure transparency and check corruption. He believes the Bill can be laid before Parliament before it goes on recess on Friday.
In a related development, Vice President Bawumia has hinted that Parliament will soon begin discussions and pass the Bill into law.
He said Cabinet has also approved the draft adding that the RTI is critical in the anti -corruption campaign stressing government's commitment to the fight against corruption.
The Vice President said, that is the only way to give investors the confidence and peace of mind to make Ghana the preferred choice for business."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"193"	2018-03-19	"Lawyer Samson Lardy Anyenini host of Newsfile on JoyNews and member of the Right to Information (RTI) Action Campaign Group, is calling on the Speaker of Parliament Prof. Aaron Mike Oquaye and members of Parliament to read the RTI bill and stop making excuse for the delay in the passing of the bill.
The Speaker reportedly said making access to information from the public sector mandatory through the passage of the Bill without including private businesses was a road that would lead nowhere.
Prof. Oquaye, according to a citifmonline.com report said, “I was not happy, particularly with one aspect. That is, information can only be compelled from the public service, but that private businesses, foreign companies and others cannot be compelled. There is a symbiosis between corruption, corrupt officials and the businesses they do business with. I would suggest publicly that it must encompass everybody; the private sector, the public sector, the business promoters, the business consultants and those people who have some very interesting titles but who themselves are the real promoters of corrupt practices. For those persons, the Right to Information Bill must stretch to all of them before it can really be meaningful.”
These claims did not go down well with Lawyer Sampson Anyenini, who is a strong advocate for the passing of the RTI bill into law.
He expressed great disappointment at the level of ‘ignorance’ exhibited by the Speaker of Parliament and advised the latter to read the Bill to inform himself of its contents.
Lawyer Samson Lardy said he is shocked at the Speaker’s remarks because the bill has clearly stated how information can be accessed with the provision of information commissions which will be created when the bill is passed into law. 
“To my utmost shock and biggest disappointment the speaker of Parliament is heard granting an interview and claiming that there is a bigger problem with the bill, and that if it is passed in its present form it will be meaningless because it does not capture the private sector. You can only get information from the public sector, Right Honorable Speaker with the greatest of respect to you, pick the bill in front of you and read it, read just the preamble not any section. Everything has been provided for. Information that should be exempt had been provided for. Where to get the information, there are supposed to be information commissions,” he said in an interview with GhanaWeb.
The RTI Bill, which is expected to make information easily accessible by the media and Ghanaians to boost the fight against corruption, has been in legislation for over 22 years now because successive governments have failed to implement it despite several assurances.
Efforts to pressurize the lawmakers to pass the bill have proven futile over the years.
The Right to information bill according to Lawyer Anyenini has been in existence for over 22 years, hence the reason for various organization to come together to send a reminder to the President to pass the bill into law and help citizens to be able to have easy access to information. 
President of Ghana, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, on the 6th of March, during the 61st Independence Day celebrations, promised Ghanaians that, the RTI bill was going to be passed into law before Parliament goes on recess. A few days to recess, and it is unclear whether the bill will be laid before Parliament before the break.
 “There is, however, one piece of the anti-corruption framework that is yet to be put in place- the Right to Information Bill. It will increase transparency and add another critical weapon to the armoury in the fight against corruption. After many years of hesitation we intend to bring the Bill again to Parliament and work to pass it into law before the end of this meeting of Parliament,” the president is reported to have said."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"194"	2018-03-19	"Private legal practitioner, Samson Lardy Anyenini, has indicated that no group has issued threats against President Nana Akufo-Addo or parliament over the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
Mr Anyenini, a member of the Action Campaign Group, further urged legislators to be focused and ensure that the bill is laid before parliament rises on Friday, March 23.
2018 marks 22 years since the first RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
It also marks 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid before Parliament until February 5, 2010.
President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo revealed government’s commitment to the passage of the bill in his speech at Ghana’s 61st independence celebration.
“After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before Parliament rises,” he said.
After several calls for parliament to follow through and pass the bill, first Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Joseph Osei Owusu, said no pressure group can threaten Parliament to pass the bill into law but Mr Anyenini is urging legislators to get to work and stop the rhetoric.
“No group is threatening parliament, no group threatened the president to make the declaration on the 6th of March that the bill will be laid and passed before they rise. They are rising on Friday; we have said that we know the President’s promise was not realistic but at the minimum we should have the bill in parliament,” he told Moro Awudu on Monday 19 March 2018.
For him, “there is no bill that has been worked on thoroughly like this one” in order to empower ordinary citizens.
He said the bill is for the public but journalists find themselves in positions where they will use it a lot more but “it is not for journalists”.
He maintained that public information is not a private property for anyone to hoard.
“The president knew what he was doing before he made the promise because he knew the bill was ready, what is the problem now?” he questioned.
He stated that the president must redeem his image and ensure that the bill is passed."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"195"	2018-03-19	"As part of its campaign promises in the build-up to the 2016 election, the New Patriotic Party (NPP) led government has come under intense pressure to redeem its pledge by speeding up the passage of the Right To Information (RTI) Bill. 
The RTI Bill, which is expected to make information easily accessible by the media and Ghanaians to boost the fight against corruption, has been in legislation for over 22 years now.
But advocacy groups including Right To Information [RTI] coalition relentlessly continue to pressurize duty-bearers to have the bill passed. 
Speaking to Ghanaweb, Samson Lardy Anyenini, a member of the RTI coalition stressed the importance of the bill to journalists and even public officials. 
According to Mr. Anyenini, the Bill when passed will help rid the media landscape of false and speculative news stories as details of government contracts will be made available within a required time without restrictions. 
The private legal practitioner also allayed fears of government officials arguing that the 22-year-old bill when passed will help reduce defamatory reports that disrepute public officials with good standing since there will be opportunities for journalists to access the right information before reportage.
“Go to the NLA where it’s being reported that something untoward had gone on. Ask for the contract and see if they will give it to you. They won’t. Even if they will, they will pick and choose which portion to give to you, but with the passage of the RTI Bill they will be compiled to make all information available.” 
“Journalism in an RTI regime will be one without speculation. In fact, if you look at it carefully it will help public officials. We are hearing things from Flagstaff House, Korle bu among others, all the media has done on these issues is to speculate, but an RTI law will take away the speculation.” Mr. Anyenini said. "	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"196"	2018-03-19	"Some Ghanaians have thrown their weight behind the move by pressure group, Right to Information Coalition, calling on government to lay the Right to Information (RTI) Bill before parliament within 10 days.
Some people who spoke to Ghanaweb TV at the University of Ghana believe that the 10-day ultimatum was a step in the right direction since the passage of the RTI Bill has been long overdue. 
For one lady, the 10-day ultimatum given government is even too much time as many years have already been wasted. 
A few others however were of the view that the NPP government was still in its infant stage, thus more time is needed to pass the RTI Bill.
The Right to Information Coalition on March 15, 2018, gave government a 10-day ultimatum to lay the RTI Bill before parliament to be passed into law before the house raises.
This reaction is as a result of the coalition’s displeasure at the repeated broken promises regarding the passage of the Right to Information Bill.
The group believes that government’s failure to pass the Bill is not just an infringement on the ‘constitutional democratic and human rights’ of Ghanaians but an injury to the country’s democracy.
It can be recalled that during the recently held 61st Independence Day celebration, President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo reiterated his commitment to the fight against corruption by saying that Parliament is likely to pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI) before it goes on recess.
The Right to Information Bill was first drafted in 1999 under the supervision of governance think-tank, Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA).
The document went through series of reviews in 2003, 2005 and 2007 before finding a temporary home in Parliament on February 5, 2010."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"197"	2018-03-18	" Majority Leader Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu has been accused by George Loh of sabotaging the passage of the much-awaited RTI Bill into Law during the sixth Parliament.
 According to the Former Vice Chair on Parliament’s Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, George Loh the Right to Information Bill, which was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 was left with only three readings in Parliament to become law in 2016 but Majority Leader Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu then a Minority Leader stated on the floor of Parliament that his colleagues in the Minority are not interested in passing the Bill.
 “We had shepherded the bill and we were left with just a few clauses. But you know when it got to the crunch and we were supposed to do it…it was the opposition leader then, Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu, who said there were better things they [Minority] are thinking about, [Mensah-Bonsu said] our people are not willing to do it, we would not want to do it. We [NPP Minority members] have had a meeting and we think that this is not the right time so when we [NPP] come [to power] we will pass it,”
 Speaking on Citi FM’s news analysis show The Big Issue today March 17, 2018, the former MP for North Dayi Constituency, George Loh clarified that the committee he headed as Vice Chair did all the necessary amendments to the bill to get it passed but the then Minority were adamant.
 He added that if the current government is interested in getting the bill passed, it can be done in just three days.
 “So in actual fact, in three days, if the government is minded to ensure that the Attorney General comes to sit in Parliament and be part of this bill, it could be passed. We have done all the work. We’ve incorporated all the suggestions and did all the necessary engagements,” he added.
 Meanwhile, President Akufo Addo has assured Ghanaians that his government will take the necessary steps to get the RTI passed in no time.
 Addressing Ghanaians at the 61st Independence Day parade in Accra on March 6, 2018, Nana Akufo disclosed that in addition to the creation of the Special Prosecutor’s office, his government will champion the passage of the Right to Information bill."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"198"	2018-03-18	" First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Joseph Osei Owusu has said no pressure group can threaten Parliament to pass the RTI Bill into law. A pressure group, Right to Information Coalition on March 15, 2018, gave the government a 10-day ultimatum to lay the RTI Bill before parliament so as the house will pass the Bill into Law.
 2018 marks 22 years since the first Right to Information RTI Bill was drafted under the auspices of the Institute of Economic Affairs, IEA.
 It also marks 16 years since the Executive arm of government in 2002 drafted the first RTI Bill. The draft Executive Bill was subsequently reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was never laid in Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 However speaking in an interview with Radio Ghana on the ten-day ultimatum given by the RTI Action Campaign Group, First Deputy Speaker Joseph Osei Owusu stated that Parliament works through procedures and would expedite action on the Bill if it is brought back to the House.
 He added that a lot of work has already been done on the Bill, this means there will be very little work to be done if the same thing is presented.
 In a related development, Majority Leader Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu has been accused by George Loh of sabotaging the passage of the much-awaited RTI Bill into Law during the sixth Parliament.
 According to the Former Vice Chair on Parliament’s Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, George Loh the Right to Information Bill, RTI Bill which was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 was left with only three readings in Parliament to become law in 2016 but Majority Leader Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu then a Minority Leader stated on the floor of Parliament that his colleagues in the Minority are not interested in passing the Bill.
 “We had shepherded the bill and we were left with just a few clauses. But you know when it got to the crunch and we were supposed to do it…it was the opposition leader then, Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu, who said there were better things they [Minority] are thinking about, [Mensah-Bonsu said] our people are not willing to do it, we would not want to do it. We [NPP Minority members] have had a meeting and we think that this is not the right time so when we [NPP] come [to power] we will pass it,”
 George Loh added that if the current government is interested in getting the bill passed, it can be done in just three days."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"199"	2018-03-17	" It’s been 22 years since the IEA pioneered the first draft of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill. Government did its draft RTI Bill reviewed it in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but never took it to Parliament until February 5, 2010.
 The Right to Information Bill has since suffered a series of failed promises to pass it. The NPP and NDC have simply paid lip service and deliberately refused to pass it to empower citizens to demand accountability on compulsion of law. The 5th and 6th parliaments failed to pass it giving absolutely ridiculous excuses.
 The RTI Coalition with key spokespersons like Lawyer Akoto Ampaw and Mina Mensah advocated for poor citizens relentlessly despite the deliberate acts to frustrate them to give up the fight. Later in 2016, the Multimedia Group and I petitioned Speaker Doe Adjaho to prioritize its passage over the SpyBill.
 The house swung into action but it was election time and the NDC majority most shockingly and unprecedentedly allowed the NPP minority to botch the process.
 Campaigning was more important than making themselves available to pass a law President John Mahama and officers of State had promised citizens and the international community they will pass.
 The NPP was interested in a possible election victory and a political advantage in taking the glory for the passage of the RTI law. They didn’t bother that that would be the third time the bill will have to be reintroduced and the process started all over again at the expense of the poor taxpayer.
 No bill has been thoroughly done as this, yet it has never been deemed urgent to enjoy the swift passage that many bills prepared overnight have enjoyed. In fact, when the NPP promised to pass it, I thought it would be the first they would pass on winning the elections. Despite assurances including a firm declaration by Minister for Information, Mustapha Hamid, that the RTI Bill would be laid in Parliament in July 2017, the Bill was not part of the many placed in the house and passed since the NPP assumed office.
 This, including the fact that the President made no mention of it in his last State of the Nation Address got the RTI ACTION CAMPAIGN GROUP gathering at Alisa Hotel in February to strategize and issuing a statement demanding timelines for its passage.
 The group had the CDD, GII, TUC, GIBA, MFWA, IMANI, and over thirty other CSO’s uniting in the call for action (others include Occupy Ghana, Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, RTI Coalition, Citi FM, Adom FM, Alliance for Women in Media, Joy FM, Daily Graphic, Business Day, Legal Resources Centre, Ghana Coalition for NGO’s in Health, CSO Platform on SDG’s, GIBA, Centre of Employment for Persons with Disability, POS Foundation, TUC, Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition).
 The RTI ACTION CAMPAIGN GROUP invites all to remind H.E President Nana Akufo Addo of his March 6, pledge to have the RTI Bill laid and passed before Parliament rises. Mr President, Parliament rises on March 23, 2018. The RTI Bill is not on the order paper detailing business for next week. Well, it is not too late to lay it on an order paper addendum. It is obviously not possible for this session to pass it.
 Please, at the minimum, just lay this democracy-entrenching and citizen-empowering law for passage at the next session starting May, to give meaning to the article 21 “right to information”; to give meaning to the article 41 citizens duty “to protect and preserve public property and expose and combat misuse and waste of public funds and property”.
 Truth is, this law should have been passed before the Office of Special Prosecutor Act. The corruption fight will not be won without an RTI law. Let’s together help the President do right by us and NOW!  The RTI is a democratic imperative. The 10-day countdown started Wednesday is on. 7 days more to go.
 Supplying public information to citizens and the media must not remain at the whim of officers who are paid with our taxes, housed, transported and fed by us but who feel information about how they spend our money or govern is their private or family property. A promise made on Independence Day must be kept. Your integrity, sir!"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"200"	2018-03-10	"The National Democratic Congress (NDC) administration put in best measures to fight corruption in the country, Dr Clement Apaak, Member of Parliament for Builsa North, has indicated.
According to him, the John Mahama administration put in several measures to deal with the canker.
Dr Apaak said the National Anti-Corruption Action Plan was established to help fight graft. Similarly, the Citizens’ Complaints Unit was also established to provide the leeway for Ghanaians to provide information on corrupt officials.
His comments come on the heels of assurances given by President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo that the Right To Information Bill will be passed as part of the anti-corruption drive.
Mr Akufo-Addo gave the assurance while delivering a speech at the 61st Independence Day ceremony in Accra on Tuesday, 6 March.
Commenting on this on TV3’s New Day programme on Saturday, 10 March, Dr Apaak said: “We are all at risk, so for example, if a hospital is supposed to be built and yet a shoddy work is done, where the equipment used is sub-standard and as a result of that people lose their lives, you cannot predetermine whether that person is going to be a supporter or sympathiser of party A or party B or what the social or economic status of that person is going to be. So, we are all potential victims of acts of corruption. That is why every government since Dr Kwame Nkrumah’s reign, has made it an issue to fight the canker of corruption.
“We have come a long way, we in NDC did our part. The National Anti-corruption Action Plan was unveiled at the time former President John Mahama appointed Daniel Batidam to serve as the lead advisor in the office of the president, working with the implementation agencies. I don’t know what this government is doing about the plan.
“We even went on to set up the Citizens’ Complaints Unit to allow citizens easy access to bring forward information that can be actionable. But if we can pass the RTI bill which we wanted to do before we left office but the NPP refused to collaborate, it will help.
“If they want to pass the bill, so be it, we will all support that because, if for nothing at all, it puts into the toolkit, another important implement that we can use.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"201"	2018-03-10	"The proposed Right To Information (RTI) Bill of Ghana which has been in the country's Parliament for over a decade and a half without being passed, is expected to give the public access to information held by public institutions and private entities which use state funds.
According to President Akufo-Addo of Ghana in his March 6, 2018, independence day address, the government has set a fresh timeline to get the RTI passed and it will be before the rising of parliament this year... Mr. Kevin Taylor of Loud Silence Media on March 9, 2018, played host to an RTI ?(https://lnkd.in/dmHTz8A)? seminar at the Embassy of Ghana in Washington DC, USA.
The event Coordinator was Oral Ofori of TheAfricanDream LLC and His Excellency Dr. Barfour Adjei-Barwuah - Ghana's Ambassador to the US - was the special guest of honor. 
The panelists included Jeffrey Bartholet who is a Senior Editor with the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting, Thomas Susman who is Director of Governmental Affairs Office at the American Bar Association, and George Kwasi Bright who is the publisher of the Afrikan Post newspaper. This video is from the event..."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"202"	2018-03-08	"President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo has reiterated his commitment to the fight against corruption saying he will pray Parliament pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI) before it goes on recess.
The RTI Bill which was presented to Parliament in 2013 has remained on the shelves up till now.
The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights. The bill will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society”.
Addressing a gathering at the 61st Independence Day celebration at the Black Star Square in Accra on Tuesday, March 6, 2018, President Akufo-Addo assured the RTI will come into force to boost the fight against corruption.
“Fellow Ghanaians, corruption, or, more specifically, the stealing of public funds, continues to hold back the development of our nation. Corruption is not a partisan matter and we must all act to protect the public purse. With the office of the Special Prosecutor now in place we can expect more prosecutions for corruption in the coming months and public officials, present and past, should be on notice that they would be held accountable for their stewardship of our public finances,” he noted.
He added: “There is, however, one piece of the anti-corruption framework that is yet to be put in place; The Right to Information Act. It would increase transparency and add another critical weapon to the armoury in the fight against corruption. After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before the end of this meeting of Parliament.
“The protection of the public purse is a social common good, and it depends on all of us. It is in all our interest that corruption does not thrive, and we police each other’s behaviour. Going Beyond Aid means Ghanaians should not serve as fronts for foreign companies to defraud our country. It will mean we all pay our taxes, and it will mean we all help to take care of government property as though it were our own.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"203"	2018-03-07	" Member of Parliament for Tamale Central, Alhaji Inusah Fuseini, has stated that the two leading political parties in the country should be blamed for the delay in passing the Right to Information Bill.
 The Bill, which seeks to expand the frontiers of transparency when passed into law, has been delayed for several years in spite of promises by incoming governments.
 Speaking at the 61st Independency Day Celebration Tuesday, President Akufo- Addo promised that his government will ensure the Bill is passed before Parliament Rises.
 “There is, however, one piece of the anti-corruption framework that is yet to be put in place; the Right to Information Act. It would increase transparency and add another critical weapon to the armory in the fight against corruption. After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before Parliament rises,” he said.
 However, speaking to Bismark Brown on Atinka TV’s Ghana Nie Morning Show, the Tamale Central MP said, both the National Democratic Congress (NDC) and the New Patriotic Party (NPP) have largely contributed to the delay in passing the RTI Bill into law.
 “There ought to be a genuine commitment…  both the NPP and the NDC have played political football with the RTI.  When the NDC was in opposition, it pushed for the RTI. Now, the NPP is saying they are committed. Let the Bill come to Parliament so that all of us will work towards passing the Bill. The Bill needs to be passed,”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"204"	2018-03-06	"President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo has served notice he will give impetus to his fight against corruption by impressing on Parliament to pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI) before it goes on recess.
The RTI Bill has been gathering dust since 2013 when it first went to Parliament. The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights. The bill will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society”.
Speaking at the 61st Independence Day celebration at the Black Star Square on Tuesday, March 6, 2018, President Akufo-Addo promised the RTI will come to being to strengthen the fight against corruption.
“Fellow Ghanaians, corruption, or, more specifically, the stealing of public funds, continues to hold back the development of our nation. Corruption is not a partisan matter and we must all act to protect the public purse. With the office of the Special Prosecutor now in place we can expect more prosecutions for corruption in the coming months and public officials, present and past, should be on notice that they would be held accountable for their stewardship of our public finances,” he noted.
He added: “There is, however, one piece of the anti-corruption framework that is yet to be put in place; The Right to Information Act. It would increase transparency and add another critical weapon to the armoury in the fight against corruption. After many years of hesitation, we intend to bring a Bill again to Parliament and work to get it passed into law before the end of this meeting of Parliament.
“The protection of the public purse is a social common good, and it depends on all of us. It is in all our interest that corruption does not thrive, and we police each other’s behaviour. Going Beyond Aid means Ghanaians should not serve as fronts for foreign companies to defraud our country. It will mean we all pay our taxes, and it will mean we all help to take care of government property as though it were our own.”
He commended the Auditor General for his vigilance recently which saved the country well over Gh¢5.4 billion which “can certainly finance the Free SHS for five years.”
President Akufo-Addo said his government will continue to put in measures to block all leakages to ensure massive development in Ghana."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"205"	2018-02-28	" Accra, Feb. 27, GNA – The National Democratic Congress (NDC) on Tuesday called on government to stop denying corruption allegations levelled against some government appointees and put in measures to fight the menace.
 It said the cover-ups of corruption allegations and wrong doings of appointees is only deepening the public mistrust of the Government.
 Mr Johnson Asiedu–Nketia, the NDC General Secretary, addressing the media in Accra, said: “Fighting corruption begins with honesty and if you are starting with denials, you are only compounding the problem”.
 He, therefore, urged the Government to admit that corruption exists among public officials and start working towards addressing it… adding “This is the only country we have and we cannot sit down and deny the obvious”.
 Speaking on the 2017 Corruption Perception Index (CPI), published by Transparency International, Mr Asiedu-Nketia said the assertion that the poor performance of the country in 2016 accounted for the country’s poor performance in 2017 was unfounded.
 The 2017 CPI scored Ghana 40 per cent and ranked it 81 out of 180 countries/territories included in the index, while the 2016 index scored Ghana 43 per cent and ranked it 70.
 The CPI used nine out of the 13 data sources of independent institutions with high level of credibility to compute the index for Ghana.
 The NDC General Secretary noted that out of the nine data sources, only two was based on 2016 and even the average of those two was higher than what Ghana scored in 2017, adding; ”It is even possible that these 2016 data had pushed our scores to 40”.
 He said countries such as Burkina Fasso and Losotho, which hitherto were far behind Ghana, had now overtaken the country.
 He, therefore, blamed the country’s current poor corruption performance on the barometer on massive corruption and wrongdoings of people in government.
 Mr Asiedu-Nketia cited the infamous “Cash for Seat” allegation, saying; “Our Parliament can make mockery of it but those business expatriates who were made to pay those monies have their embassies in Ghana and are closer to those international bodies doing the rating”.
 “We are, therefore, adding our voice to civil society organisations and other non-governmental organisations to call on government as a matter of urgency to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill and all other bills aimed at fighting corruption in the country,” he added.
 Mr Asiedu-Nketia said the passage of the RTI Bill was crucial to make the work of the Special Prosecutor complete because he needed the information before he could prosecute.
 He called on the media and faith based organisations to continue offering constructive criticisms to build a better Ghana."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"206"	2008-02-28	" Fellow Comrades, the GNA on Feb. 18, in Accra reported this: - The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) Ghana, on Monday called on President John Agyekum Kufuor to make good his promise on the passage of the RTI Bill into law. In a statement signed by Nana Oye Lithur of the Coalition Secretariat the RTI indicated and we quote:
 \"The Coalition maintains its urgent call to President Kufuor to, without any further delay, and hasten the passage of the RTI Bill into law,\" The statement further stated said that RTI was a constitutional right of Ghanaians as provided in Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution. ”It noted that as early as 2005, President Kufuor promised in his State of the Nation Address to ensure the passage of the RTI Bill into law that year, to operationalize that constitutional right. Despite government's promises, Ghana still had no legislation on RTI, the Coalition said, adding that, President Kufuor \"conspicuously excluded\" the RTI from his final State of the Nation address to Parliament last week”.
 \"One would expect hat President Kufuor in his professed commitment to democratic, transparent and accountable governance would pass the RTI law to fulfil these aspirations but sadly, this has not been the case. \"This omission once again registers this as another failed promise by President Kufuor and the President owes it to Ghanaians to explain why he failed to provide any policy direction on the RTI Law in his State of the Nation Address”.
 Against the above background, I am privileged on behalf of my colleagues to tell the nation that this will never happen, as President Kufuor will never sign this proclamation. If his predecessor J.J Rwalings was afraid to sign this same Bill, because he knew it would put him at risk and affect his personal protection, why do we expect President Kufuor to do just that to betray his own interest? Ghanaians wake-up from your slumbers, open your eyes to see what is as stake. If we want to serve this country and free our people from the shackles of poverty, pursuit for peace, freedom and practice the rule of law, then we need to be honest and fair. Why should the forum sit down for our people to be ridiculed by unfaithful leaders who put their personal interest above those who mistakenly gave them the mandate to rule and treat them with impunity just because they paid heavily for that position by bribing the electorates? In our view, we should begin to look at politics differently; otherwise we can never solve our problems and hold our leaders accountable for their lies. Ignorance is punishable. Against this background, we members of the ICPPF, would like to call upon our Presidential candidate Dr. Paa Kwesi Nduom and the rank and files of the CPP to be sensitive to the cries of Ghanaians who are calling for a positive change if they go out there to demonstrate their commitment, and promote their “Progressive Social Democratic Policies” by ensuring that the passage of Right to Information Bill is signed so as to set the people free once again in our history. ICPPF can assure our readers that Dr. Paa Kwesi Nduom in a private communication on the same -subject matter, promised the leadership of ICPPF with this simple word: “I Will” PKN. For what reason are the people of this country calling for a change? They are calling for a change because of corruption and mismanagement in the Country that the other political parties have failed to address. Dr. Nduom has confirmed his readiness to face those obstacles that have over the years damaged the image of the country and its government, obstacles that have undoubtedly brought a halt to our development. Fellow comrades, we take this opportunity to extend our gratitude to Dr. Paa Kwesi Nduom for promising this nation that he will sign the Right to Information Bill and pass it into law when he is given the mandate to rule and protect his people. We congratulate Dr. Paa Kwesi Nduom for accepting this challenge in such a difficult moment It is our hope that our people have ears to hear his call for justice. We the executives of International Convention People’s Party Forum will like to assure Dr. Kwesi Nduom and his executives, that we will give them our unreserved support when it comes to making policy decision needed for development projects in areas like agriculture, education, science and technology, administration, religion, culture, law, politics, medicine, trade, economy, infrastructure, etc. with the help of our Diaspora experts.
 We are out there to help Ghana. We invite all Ghanaian professional in the Diaspora who are experts in the above-mentioned areas; to join us in support our beloved country in its development endeavour... May God bless you all? May God bless Ghana our motherland? Serve Ghana Now Supporters and prospective individuals seeking to join or support the International Convention People’s Party Forum can contact the secretariat for further information.
 Home address: CPP Germany, Morse Street 5. 40215 Dusseldorf. Tel: 0049-211-3849790 or 0049-162-3524741. cppgermany@yahoo.com On behalf of ICPPF executives and members, Organizers-ICPPF- Secretariat Organizers: Mr. Prince Aidoo-Germany (cppgermany@yahoo.com) Dr. Kenneth Yanney-UK"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"207"	2018-02-26	" Vice President Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia has disclosed that government has directed Parliament to ensure the Right to Information (RTI) Bill is passed into law before the end of 2018.
 According to the Vice President who was speaking at the Audit Service’s 8th Annual Accountability Lectures, the passage of the RTI Bill has become necessary as it is crucial to the fight against corruption.
 He believes unrestricted access to information will enhance the work of the Attorney General and Special Prosecutor - who have been charged to work together to protect the public purse.
 Dr. Bawumia said, “Government holds a firm conviction that the work of Auditor General and the Special Prosecutor can be enhanced when we have unfettered access to information. President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo has directed that work on the Right to Information Bill be expedited for its passage this year and I’m assuring Ghanaians that the Right to Information Bill will soon become a law of the land.”Bawumia commends Auditor General for retrieving GHC5.4bn from ‘ghost’ claims; calls for prosecution of culprits
 The Audit Service in its recent report disclosed that it rejected GHC5.4 billion out of the liabilities of GHC11.279 billion submitted by MDAs to the Finance Ministry for payment.
 The Auditor General, Daniel Yaw Domelevo, explained that the amount was rejected as a result of the absence of relevant documentation such as warrants, contracts documents, invoices, procurements records, Stored Received Advices, among other considerations.
 Commenting on the findings of the report, Vice President Dr. Bawumia commended the Auditor General for retrieving a the whopping GHC5.4bn from the ‘ghost’ claims.
 The retrieval of the GHC5.4bn claims according to Dr. Bawumia is an indication the Auditor General is committed and supports government’s fight against corruption.
 Calling for the prosecution of public officials who have deliberately dub the state Dr. Bawumia said, “This GHC5.4bn liability are ghost claims but they were not generated by ghosts. We want to see the prosecution of the culprits.” Government won't interfere in the Auditor General's job – Bawumia
 Dr. Bawumia also assured the Audit Service of lack of government interference.
 He said the service will be well resourced in the coming days to make the work of auditors more efficient and effective so as to protect the public purse.
 “Government will assist the Audit Service by providing the necessary support to ensure that collectively we safeguard the public purse against those who believe that their wealth ought to be bigger than our common goal,” he stressed."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"208"	2018-02-20	"Minority members in Parliament have tasked government to present the Right to Information Bill to the House to be worked on into law to boost the fight against corruption. 
The call came up during the debate to consider the approval of the report of the Appointment’s Committee on Martin Alamisi Burns Kaiser Amidu as Special Prosecutor.
Contributing to the debate in the House, deputy Minority Chief Whip, Ahmed Ibrahim indicated that though the Office of the Special Prosecutor is a laudable idea, corruption cases could only be fought with evidence.
He suggested that without evidence, the Special Prosecutor may fail in his duties. 
Ahmed Ibrahim argued that the fight against corruption is a shared responsibility as such everyone should have equal and unhindered access to information to ensure that factual allegations are made against people.
He bemoaned the rate at which people rely on perception as evidence of corruption and condemned such acts insisting that it derails the corruption fight.
The Banda MP explained “the Special Prosecutor nominee is saying that he will use the auditor general report that will be debated in parliament as the basis. 
Mr Speaker if you go to article 21 clause 1(f) in the constitution, it is clear that this house or Ghana must pass the Right to Information bill. 
Mr Speaker fighting corruption is a shared responsibility, it is not the preserve of only one personality and everybody no matter which side you belong to we must all contribute but what if you don’t have the information? What if you have no right to the information?
Mr Speaker much as we want to fight corruption, we must take urgent steps to pass the Right to Information Bill into law and that will create the access for you, for the media, for everybody so that corruption will not just be based on perception. 
Somebody raised corruption allegation then when pushed to the corner then he responds it was a perception. I believe Mr Speaker that the best remedy to do away with perception and come to the realities whereby if allegations are made against somebody you can use the RTI law to press and get the right information and that will do away with the perception and Ghana will be seen to be really fighting against the incidence of corruption ”.
His colleague on the Minority side, Emmanuel Bedzra during the SONA debate last week argued that even though the Special Prosecutor was good and will contribute to the corruption fight, it was not in itself the ultimate panacea to the canker.
The Ho West MP was convinced allowing people access information at the Municipal, District, Metropolitan, Ministries and other public offices will enormously help in minimizing the canker to the barest minimum.
“If really we want to fight corruption, we need information from the ministry, we need information from departments, we need information from all agencies but where is the Right to Information Act and where is the Bill that we all worked on in the Sixth Parliament to the extent that we have gotten to consideration stage”.Parliament approves Martin Amidu
Parliament on Tuesday, February 20th approved Martin Amidu as the first occupier of the Office of the Special Prosecutor.
The debate to approve him was challenged by former deputy Attorney General, Dominic Ayine who requested that the process is halted as his suit against Mr. Amidu’s nomination is still pending at the Supreme Court.
Dr. Dominic Ayine’s suit at the Supreme Court is challenging the nomination of Martin Amidu for the position of Special Prosecutor because of his age.
In his argument, he said the Office of the Special Prosecutor falls under the broad category of public officers who by the constitution must retire by age 60 with a possible extension to 65 years.
Citing Standing order 93(1), Dr. Ayine prayed the Speaker of Parliament to give his opinion on the matter to serve as judgment challenge he put up.
Citing Standing order 93(1) suggests that Parliament shall not discuss any matter in Court in a manner that will be prejudicial to the case in Court.
But the Speaker of Parliament, Professor Aaron Mike Oquaye, ruled against Dr. Ayine’s argument thus making way for Amidu’s approval.
The Speaker explained “in this particular case it is notable that the circumstances of the case, the nature of the case, the relief being sort, the stage that proceedings have reached or all such relevant other matters were not brought before this honourable House. 
The separation of powers requires that all three arms of government must be given their due regard if the mere filing of a writ in any court should stop parliament from doing its work, then of course parliament is subjugated automatically to the courts, there must be mutual respect between all arms of government, the legislator, the judiciary and the executive. 
There is nothing before me this morning to persuade me that the matter allegedly before the court or any matter regarding same or any order made by the court alleged today   is such that Parliament cannot do its work” 
“The motion is accordingly rejected” he concluded.
In the report that was accepted leading to Martin Amidu’s approval, the Committee recommended among other things that “given Mr. Martin Alamisi Burns Kaiser’s high standard of competence, forthrightness in answering questions, independent-mindedness, selflessness, solid principles and an in-depth appreciation of the task ahead backed by his onerous experience, knowledge of the law and his promise to be above political colourisation, the Nominee qualifies to serve as the Special Prosecutor”."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"209"	2018-02-17	" The First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Hon. Joseph Osei-Owusu, has demonstrated many times when he chairs the House’s vetting sessions, that he’s extremely sharp and is also a very fair person.
 What I also find admirable is that he seems amiable and someone with a great sense of humour. Additionally, he comes across as a person who wouldn’t make a promise lightly.
 So why is Mr Osei-Owusu not honouring a promise he made, as far back as February 2016, regarding the Right to Information (RTI) Bill?
 Actually, the above is the question that the Coalition on the Right to Information, Ghana, is asking the Honourable Member for Bekwai. And I associate myself with their concern.
 On Monday, February 5, 2018 the Coalition published an Open Letter in the Ghanaian Times to Mr. Osei-Owusu about his promise.
 The following is an abridged version of the Open Letter signed by Mina Mensah, Head of the Africa Office, Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative and Vice-Chair, Coalition on RTI, Ghana:THE OPEN LETTER
 I have decided to use this medium to communicate with you because I read something attributed to you which I find very disturbing.
 Before I get to what I read, I don’t think we as a Coalition thanked you enough for the role you played in supporting the advocacy for the passage of the RTI when you were in opposition.
 I want to especially mention the Technical Meeting for Selected MPs organised by the Coalition that you chaired on February 29, 2016 when you committed yourself and other MPs present to be Champions of the RTI Bill in Parliament.
 FLASHBACK: On May 3, 2016, in an interview on Joy News you questioned why the then government had failed in prioritising the passage of the RTI Bill ….
 You actually urged Ghanaians to insist on the passage of the bill because they have a right to information. On behalf of the Coalition, I say thank you.
 FLASHBACK: Another time when I gave you kudos was on September 28, 2016 when you described the then President, His Excellency John Mahama’s claim of being frustrated about the delay in the passage of the bill as “hypocritical” during an interview on Citi News.
 To quote you, as reported, “… the President also knows that any time the Executive considers something a priority, it gets done so if it were their priority, it would have been done. This public expression of frustration for me is rather hypocritical.”
 This is why when your party won power in 2016 I felt that the hassle and struggles of yesteryears to get the Bill passed were over.
 After all we now have champions in the House, including one who has been in the trenches with the Coalition, working on the Bill to make it more robust, and who knows the benefits of an RTI law to citizens in general and Ghanaians in particular.
 FAST FORWARD TO JANUARY 31, 2018: Commenting on the RTI Bill during an interview on ‘Morning Express’, a programme on Radio XYZ, you allegedly said: “It’s not different from any other bill ….
 “As far as I’m concerned, it is like any other Bill. For me if you ask me, the more critical Bills that are still pending are the Property Rights of Spouses and the Intestate Succession Bills. These are things that affect the everyday people.”
 My question is: what has changed? The RTI Bill is no longer a priority as far as you are concerned?
 Oh, and by the way, the RTI Bill when passed will actually enhance the enjoyment of the two very critical Bills you mentioned.
 You reportedly alluded to the fact that the Constitution has stated limits, I beg to differ, the Constitution just said in Art 21 (1) (f) “information subject to such QUALIFICATIONS AND LAWS as are necessary in a democratic society”.
 Moreover, since you were one of the people who worked relentlessly to get the Bill amended I am sure you are aware that a Right to Information law is not about “limits”, as you put it, and Ghana’s RTI law is definitely not about limitations to access information.
 Again, it is true that a Constitutional provision can be enforced in court and (the pressure group) Occupy Ghana did that as you alluded to, and were given the information. But let’s not forget that they paid GHC 1,000.00 for it, excluding legal fees – filing fees, etc.
 If you say anyone can go to court, true, but I am wondering how many of your constituents can afford the legal fees if they were to go to court?
 The NPP 2016 Manifesto (promises to): “ensure the passage of the Right to Information Bill if the present Parliament delays in doing so”; (and adds) our Commitment to passing the Right to Information Bill will further enhance transparency in oil and gas sector.”
 I sincerely hope that Ghanaians will not have to wait till 2020 for a law that is long overdue. The RTI Bill has been with the Cabinet for one full year, amidst promises but no movement.
 Yours truly,
 Mina Mensah
 *     *     * As indicated above, I sympathise with the position of the RTI campaigners. Notably, the Bill has been awaiting passage for more than ten years.
 Unfortunately, as at the time of writing this, I had not seen any Times rejoinder from Mr Osei-Owusu; and my checks also did not reveal a response to the Coalition.
 Why the silence, I wonder.
 Or could the silence of Parliament be due to a historic surprise being planned? I would like to think so! If not, then the following is my suggestion:
 As UNESCO and our Government have announced that Ghana is to host this year’s World Press Freedom Day, marked on May 3, why not ensure the passage of the Bill on that date?
 The eyes of the global media fraternity will be on this country during the UN celebration. Therefore the news of the birth of the RTI law on May 3 would ‘go viral’ and boost Ghana’s democratic credentials.
 It would also be a memorable climax to the celebration of World Press Freedom Day 2018, and serve as a fitting appreciation for the choice of our country by UNESCO for its flagship media event."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"210"	2018-02-16	" Minority in parliament has chastised President Akufo-Addo for failing to mention anything about the Right to Information Bill during his State of the Nation Address last week Thursday.
 The Minority strongly advised government to walk their talk in the fight against corruption by passing the Right to Information Bill into law led by the MP for Ho West, Emmanuel Bedzra, the Minority insisted that government there was the need to pass into law the RTI to give meaning to the fight.
 Emmanuel Bedzra argued that even though the Special Prosecutor was good and will contribute to the corruption fight, it was not in itself the ultimate panacea to the canker.
 The Ho West MP was convinced allowing people access information at the Municipal, District, Metropolitan, Ministries and other public offices will enormously help in minimizing the canker to the barest minimum.
 “If really we want to fight corruption, we need information from the ministry, we need information from departments, we need information from all agencies but where is the Right to Information Act and where is the Bill that we all worked on in the Sixth Parliament to the extent that we have gotten to consideration stage and that Bill has not found space in the President’s State of the Nation Address.
 Indeed are we ready to fight corruption? Is it only about the Special Prosecutor or we need information about other Ministries, sectors, and Agencies then we can fight corruption. That was what was missing from the State of the Nation Address” Emmanuel Bedzra emphasized.
 The legislator was, however, not enthused that contrary to the president’s unending talk about his zeal to fight corruption, he has done very little in this regard.
 He cited Akufo-Addo’s statement before the House last year when he pledged to pass the RTI but a year after nothing has been heard about it."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"211"	2018-02-02	"The Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA) has noted that it will be a disgrace for Ghana to host the World Press Freedom Day without passing the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
On May 2 and 3 2018, Ghana will host the global community for the celebration of this year’s World Press Freedom Day (WPFD). It will be the first time Ghana is serving as the host country for the global event and the only country in West Africa after Senegal to host this important event.
According to the Executive Director, Sulemana Braimah, it is not too late for the government to pass the Bill, and passing the Bill will show the country’s commitment to the pursuit of democratic values.
“It will be embarrassing for us if we host the World Press Freedom Day and we still do not have the RTI bill. It is quite worrying that countries around us and countries in Africa, that we appear to be doing better than, who praise Ghana all the time, have gone ahead to have the Right to Information law in place,” he said.
He noted that it is quite sad that over the period of 6 years, the number of countries that have passed the RTI Bill has increased from 6 to 21, but Ghana is not included.
“We can talk about our three neighbouring Togo, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire and in West Africa, we can talk about Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Niger, Guinea, all these countries have the RTI Bill in place,” he said.
The NPP government, in the build-up to the 2016 elections, promised to expedite the passage of the bill.
The Foundation’s Executive Director, Sulemana Braimah, wants the Akufo-Addo government to pass the bill before hosting the World Press Freedom Day this year.
Meanwhile, the Vice President, Dr Mahamudu Bawumia has promised that government will facilitate the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill this year.
He said the New Patriotic Party (NPP) government is committed to enhancing accountability and dealing with corruption.
The Right to Information (RTI) Coalition, hit the streets in September 2017, to raise awareness on the need for the passage of the bill.
The Right to Information (RTI) Coalition expressed disappointment in President Mahama’s leadership for failing to ensure the passage of the bill before he exited.
According to the Coalition, “President Mahama had not demonstrated a strong commitment to the passage of the RTI Bill, despite his party’s promises in their 2008 and 2012 manifestos.”
Many advocates of free speech have criticized successive governments for their lack of interest in ensuring that the Bill is passed.
The bill, which has been in and out of Parliament for over a decade, is yet to be passed in spite of its potential of enhancing access to information in the country."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"212"	2018-02-01	" The First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Joseph Osei Owusu has disclosed that the Right To Information (RTI) Bill has not been laid before the House for consideration despite it being high among the expectations of many Ghanaians.
 The MP for Bekwai Constituency was speaking to Kofi Oppong Asamoah on the Morning Xpress on Wednesday when he noted that the bill, when passed into law, will not make any difference in the processes of attaining information from government.
 “It’s not different from any other bill. As we speak now it’s not before the House yet. . .As far as I’m concerned, it’s like any other bill. For me, if you ask me, the more critical bill that are still pending are the Property Rights of spouses and the Interstate Succession bills. These are the things that affect the everyday people,” he revealed.
 Mr Osei Owusu debunked claims that the RTI Bill would rather make information accessible to everybody as been propagated in the media. To him, the constitution had stated limits to the RTI law, therefore persons especially Journalists who feel information is being withheld from them should seek a court order if the kind of information they want is of public interest.
 “The right to information is guaranteed in the constitution. So that’s where the power is. What the constitution said was that parliament shall by law determine the limits. What that Bill is bringing is the limits so when it has not come, it is when at this point that there are no limits that you have the widest power to ask for any information,” he clarified.
 He argued that Ghanaians are rather confusing with where the strength to get information lies when in actual fact, they can pursue any information to its peak if it is of public interest.
 Citing the bus branding Saga during the erstwhile Mahama administration where Court ordered the actors to provide information regarding the contracts, he noted that anyone who wants information could go to the court and when it becomes necessary, such information will be given to them through a court order.
 The Lawyer posited that the proactive part that will make information accessible to Ghanaians at all times after the bill is passed will be costly because of how the law wants information to be shared under RTI law. He hinted it will have to come with many infrastructure and training which will definitely be at a huge cost.Why Parliament Couldn’t Pass RTI Bill
 Although anti-graft campaigners have campaigned for the RTI Bill to be passed to ease the fight against corruption, the bill has been left untouched for more than a decade since its first appearance in the House.
 Asking why the bill could not be passed in 2016 after so much work had gone into it,  Mr Osei-Wusu noted that they could not have ample time to complete the processes before Parliament went on recess in 2016.
 “We worked very hard to try and pass it before the end of the last parliament unfortunately we couldn’t. The reason is that when we finished working on it at that time, the Honourable second deputy speaker Was The chairman of the Constitutional and Legal committee a d I was his Ranking member. We worked with all the coalition and all the interest groups. We proposed a fifty page amendments to the bill. The number of amendments that were supposed to be made to the bill were fifty pages. That should tell you that if were going to go through it and amend them . . .it was going to take forever. There was no way we could do all that so a proposal was tabled the Minister agreed that we should withdraw the bill, incorporate all the amendments and represent it. Even that it was tedious but we drew it and brought it back”.
 According to him when it came they worked on it at the committee level again where there were few amendments again but when the committee worked on it and brought it’s report, the house could not work on it because it was election mood.
 “The house went into election mood and nobody was going to stay here and do amendments. After all we’re on vacation.”
 He however added the bill will go through the normal process when it is brought to parliament again."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"213"	2018-02-01	"The First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Joseph Osei-Wusu has disclosed that the Right To Information (RTI) Bill has not been laid before the House for consideration despite it being high among the expectations of many Ghanaians.
 The MP for Bekwai Constituency was speaking to Kofi Oppong Asamoah on the Morning Xpress on Wednesday when he noted that the bill, when passed into law, will not make any difference in the processes of attaining information from government.
 \"It's not different from any other bill. As we speak now it's not before the House yet. . .As far as I'm concerned, it's like any other bill. For me, if you ask me, the more critical bill that are still pending are the Property Rights of spouses and the Interstate Succession bills. These are the things that affect the everyday people,\" he revealed.
 Mr Osei-Wusu debunked claims that the RTI Bill would rather make information accessible to everybody has been propagated in the media. To him, the constitution had stated limits to the RTI law, therefore persons especially Journalists who feel information is being withheld from them should seek a court order if the kind of information they want is of public interest.
 \"The right to information is guaranteed in the constitution. So that's where the power is. What the constitution said was that parliament shall by law determine the limits. What that Bill is bringing is the limits so when it has not come, it is when at this point that there are no limits that you have the widest power to ask for any information,\" he clarified.
 He argued that Ghanaians are rather confusing with where the strength to get information lies when in actual fact, they can pursue any information to its peak if it is of public interest.
 Citing the bus branding Saga during the erstwhile Mahama administration where Court ordered the actors to provide information regarding the contracts, he noted that anyone who wants information could go to the court and when it becomes necessary, such information will be given to them through a court order.
 The Lawyer posited that the proactive part that will make information accessible to Ghanaians at all times after the bill is passed will be costly because of how the law wants information to be shared under RTI law. He hinted it will have to come with many infrastructure and training which will definitely be at a huge cost.Why Parliament Couldn't Pass RTI Bill
 Although anti-graft campaigners have campaigned for the RTI Bill to be passed to ease the fight against corruption, the bill has been left untouched for more than a decade since its first appearance in the House. Asking why the bill could not be passed in 2016 after so much work had gone into it, Mr Osei-Wusu noted that they could not have ample time to complete the processes before Parliament went on recess in 2016.
 \"We worked very hard to try and pass it before the end of the last parliament unfortunately we couldn't. The reason is that when we finished working on it at that time, the Honourable second deputy speaker was the chairman of the Constitutional and Legal committee a d I was his Ranking member. We worked with all the coalition and all the interest groups. We proposed a fifty page amendments to the bill. The number of amendments that were supposed to be made to the bill were fifty pages.
 That should tell you that if we’re going to go through it and amend them . . .it was going to take forever. There was no way we could do all that so a proposal was tabled the Minister agreed that we should withdraw the bill, incorporate all the amendments and represent it. Even that it was tedious but we drew it and brought it back\".
 According to him when it came they worked on it at the committee level again where there were few amendments again but when the committee worked on it and brought its report, the house could not work on it because it was election mood.
 \"The house went into election mood and nobody was going to stay here and do amendments. After all we're on vacation.\" He however added the bill will go through the normal process when it is brought to parliament again."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"214"	2018-01-31	"As a new era of digital journalism and social media takes hold in Ghana. A forum will be organized in Washington DC, United States (US), by communications firm Loud Silence Media to discuss the benefits of the passage of the Right To Information (RTI) bill and its ensuing effects.
Washington DC-based Ghanaian filmmaker and communication specialist Kevin Taylor who is the founder of Loud Silence Media says the forum, which will be held March 9, 2018, is part of a campaign to ensure the passage of the RTI bill brings more benefits than disadvantages to Ghanaians.
“We have to understand that our right to free information comes with lots and lots of responsibilities. We have the responsibility to share information responsibly as individuals - especially as journalists,” Mr. Taylor noted.
“We are using social media as the platform to share very sensitive and investigative news. We need to be a lot more cautious with that when the RTI bill is passed. We need to learn from people who have experience with such issues so we can brainstorm, and better be prepared” he added.
Event Coordinator for the forum Oral Ofori who is the Founder of TheAfricanDream LLC, a communication and information consultancy, disclosed the forum will be held at the embassy of Ghana in Washington DC and will be attended by Ghanaians living in the US. His Excellency Dr. Barfuor Adjei Barwuah, Ghana's Ambassador to the US will be the special guest of honor at the event.
The forum will cover topics such as verifying facts on social media, combating fake news, breaking news online, photography and visual journalism in the digital age, as well as education on the tenets of the RTI Bill.
The proposed RTI Bill which has been in Parliament for more than a decade and half without being passed, is expected to give the public access to information held by public institutions and private entities which use state funds. The government has set a fresh timeline of May 2018 to get it passed. Mr. Taylor says there will be major red flags in the media landscape when the bill is eventually passed that need to be looked at now.
“Many journalists are trained in radio or newspaper reporting but a lot more lack the skills needed for digital journalism and social media reporting. We are doing this in order to educate the media and public alike,” he explained.
To RSVP or become a media partner or sponsor of the event visit bit.ly/2rSlJBk
Mr. Taylor’s Loud Silence Media which was founded in 2012 has over the years undertaken a number of projects aimed at helping advance the socio-economic development of the country.
In 2015, Mr. Taylor received funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to produce a documentary on Ghana’s struggles with energy production and innovative power solutions in the country.
The resulting documentary, The Africa Energy Project was published internationally by Al Jazeera and other international media organizations. In 2016, Mr. Taylor launched With All Due Respect, an online television series that discusses running national issues with frankness and satire."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"215"	2018-01-31	" Centre for Democratic Development, (CDD)-Ghana has charged Ghana’s legislators to wean themselves from the corruption tag labelled against them by the citizenry.
 Speaking at the 4th edition of the Crystal Ball series organized by PNAfrica and the CDD-Ghana, under the theme “Opening up Parliament for Effective Governance”, a Senior Programmes Officer at  the CDD-Ghana, Mrs. Regina Tetteh reiterated that a recent research conducted by her  outfit showed that about 50% of the Ghanaian populace “ think that parliamentarians are corrupt”.
 “We have done loads of surveys (Afrobarometer); the citizens have this perception that Parliament is corrupt and that is dangerous for our democracy.  We will urge and plead with the leadership of Parliament to take corruption allegations very seriously to let citizens have a positive attitude towards the house,” Mrs. Tetteh lamented.
 She therefore cautioned members of the legislature to leave above reproach.
 According to her, even though the legislative assembly has done very well to pass the Office of the Special Prosecutor (OSP) bill into law, the SP’s effort and that of the House will come to nothing without the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into an Act.
 “Ghana as a nation is not going to succeed in its quest to eliminate corruption and corrupt practices if effective tool to checks corruption such as the RTI is not passed into an Act,” Madam Tetteh stressed.
 Meanwhile, a Senior Research Fellow at CDD-Ghana, Ambassador Francis Tsegah has appealed to Parliament to summon the Attorney General and Minister of Justice as well as the Information Minister over the delay in the passage of the Right to Information Bill.
 According to him, the people’s representatives must demand answers from Ms Gloria Akuffo and Mr Mustapha Abdul Hamid on reasons for the delay in the passage of the bill.
 “It’s our expectation that Parliament as an institution will summon the Attorney General, the Information Minister to explain why the RTI bill is still with the executive”, Ambassador Tsegah said."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"216"	2018-01-30	"Pressure continues to mount on government to speed up processes for the passage of the ‘Right To Information’ Bill into law. 
The Bill which is to give right and access to official information held by public institutions and private entities which perform public functions with public funds has been stalled for nearly two decades. 
Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) has joined calls by state actors, political commentators and civil society groups charging government to pass the 17-year-old Bill to empower the general public to demand accountability. 
Speaking at the 2018 IEA’s Petroleum Transparency and Accountability (P-TRAC) index forum, Senior Research Fellow at the IEA, Professor John Asafu-Adjaye observed that, a quick passage of the Bill will enhance access to information.
“We are really looking forward to the immediate passage of the RTI Bill. Not only will it enhance access to information or monitor petroleum revenue but it also enhances transparency in the public sector.”
While presenting his finding for 2017 P-TRAC, Professor John Asafu-Adjaye stressed the difficulties he faced with accessing information, especially from public institutions for his research work. "	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"217"	2018-01-29	" Mr. Robert Jackson, United States Ambassador to Ghana, has added his voice to the growing calls on government to pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI) to show that the country is truly serious about press freedom.
 He said “Ghana will host the World Press Freedom Day in May, this year. I believe that it will be fantastic for it to pass the RTI to show that it is truly serious about press freedom and I will love to see it.”
 Mr. Jackson said this when he interacted with selected journalists in Tamale on Sunday evening as part of his duty tour of the Northern Region to among others inaugurate four Community-based Health Planning and Services compounds in the region.
 Mr. Jackson lauded the government for its efforts to tackle corruption by passing the Special Prosecutor Act, and nominating the Special Prosecutor, but added that the RTI, which is believed to aid the fight against corruption, should also be passed into law.
 Media practitioners and civil society organisations championing the fight against corruption have vigorously campaigned for the passage of the RTI into law, but the RTI is yet to see the light of day, more than a decade after it was introduced in Parliament.
 The New Patriotic Party, whiles in opposition, promised to pass the RTI into law during its first year in government, but had failed to pass it as promised, and is now in its second year in government.
 Mr. Jackson gave thumbs up to journalists in the country, saying there had been great improvement in journalism practice in the country over the past two years.
 Mr. Jackson also spoke about the US Diversity Visa Lottery programme, saying more Ghanaians applied for the programme than people from any other country in the world in 2017, as the US Embassy in Accra recorded over 1.5 million applications from Ghana."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"218"	2018-01-25	" Following the just-ended President’s encounter with the media held at the Banquet Hall of the Flagstaff House on Wednesday, January 17, 2018, the president of the Ghana Journalists Association (GJA), Mr Roland Affail Monney, has lashed out at journalists for not being interested in the Right to Information Bill (RTI).
 According to him, journalists failed to take advantage of the encounter with President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo to ask about the RTI bill.
 He, however, said he was impressed with some questions asked the President which were based on the economy, security, health and corruption that affect everybody in the country.
 “Before I state whether I’m happy with the encounter or not, first let me say I’m impressed with some relevant questions, but some journalists asked amateur questions.
 “ [At] Such a high profile event, one would have expected more, since not everybody gets the opportunity to speak to the President of the country, so if God grants such opportunities, you should have researched and done your home work. The White’s would say only a good product sells itself,” he told Adom FM in an interview.
 He added that earlier that day he listened to a programme hosted by Effia Pokuah on Adom FM , in which a panellist said Ghanaian journalists had scored zero over 10, in terms of asking relevant questions.
 “I listened to a commentary by a professor and he said market women would have done better than journalists, and I agree with him,” he said.
 “In my candid opinion the high questions were more than the low questions, but because of the way most were framed, all questions were seen to be amateur but I believe journalists did not score zero at all; some asked intelligent questions but framing them was their problem,” he stated.
 “Everybody has got a field of specialization. When we come to the field, there are good reporters who might be poor in questioning and vice-versa, so in asking people to go out there, one must be sure to be armed,” he added.RTI bill
 On the RTI bill, Mr Monney said “we belong to the Coalition of the Rights to Information, for 17 years we have had problem with Parliament having to assent that bill into law.
 “It’s not only for journalists but for everybody. It will help us because if anything beats our understanding one can get the information he wants. Questions on the Right to Information bill would have covered the mediocre ones,” he said."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"219"	2018-01-14	" Private legal practitioners Ace Ankomah has described as cowards all political players from both the NPP and the NDC who have failed to pass the Right To Information, RTI, bill.
 Ace Ankomah noted that the political players from both divides are afraid of passing the RTI bill because they believe it will not go in their favour.
 According to him, the passing of the RTI bill will aid the office of special prosecutor in an immense way.
 “But politicians will in opposition promise Ghanaians they will pass it when voted into power but will later sit without doing anything.”
 He called on the NPP government as a matter of urgency to pass the RTI bill as promised.About RTI
 The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
 The bill as it has been drafted, is to give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society”.
 The Right to Information Bill was first drafted in 1999 under the former president, Jerry John Rawlings. Various advocacy groups emerged to press for the immediate passing of the bill into law in 2002. The draft bill was reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007.
 The National Democratic Congress (NDC) in its 2008 and 2012 election manifestos promised to ensure the bill is passed. In 2010, the bill was presented to Parliament for consideration.
 In 2011, the government signed unto the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative with a commitment to pass by the bill. In November 2013, the bill was formally laid before parliament.
 Former Attorney General, Deputy Dominic Ayine in 2015, moved the bill for second reading in Parliament. In October 2016, the bill was withdrawn and a replaced with a new one which was immediately laid.
 Following the dissolution of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic and the swearing-in of new Parliament in January 2017, the bill is no longer in parliament.
 It must be reintroduced to the House by the new government before work commences on it again.Gov’t’s commitment to passing RTI bill
 Rockson Ayine Bukari, the Upper East Regional Minister, on Wednesday said the government was committed to passing the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law to deepen the democratic dispensation of the country through transparency and accountability.
 He said the law would ensure that the media had easy access to information from public institutions that would enable them hold duty bearers accountable for actions that were detrimental to the growth of the nation."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"220"	2018-01-13	" Mr Rockson Ayine Bukari, the Upper East Regional Minister, on Wednesday said the government was committed to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law to deepen the democratic dispensation of the country through transparency and accountability.
 He said the law would ensure that the media had easy access to information from public institutions that would enable them hold duty bearers accountable for actions that were detrimental to the growth of the nation.
 The Regional Minister was speaking in Bolgatanga at the National Media Festival organized by The Press Foundation (TPF) to celebrate media personalities who hail from the Northern, Upper East and Upper West Regions.
 It was to encourage the media practitioners working in the three regions to contribute significantly to the development of those regions. The Regional Minister who described the media as “the wise men” said the influence of their works in the development agenda of the nation could not be measured and called for deeper engagement between government and the media to achieve accelerated development.
 He said mass communication continued to empower communities and citizens through the various media channels to be abreast with national issues and make decisions that enhance development.
 He added “knowledge they say is power and it is this power that citizens can hold duty bearers at all levels accountable to and take steps to improve their societies. In recent times the media has moved to setting the agenda and there is no doubt majority of the citizens make decisions based on information from the air, newspapers, internet, editorial notes commentaries and heated debates or discussions. These have informed the position of many Ghanaians on national issues.”
 Mr Bukari charged the journalists in the three regions to change the common perception held by people that “all is bad here” because the regions were not as bad as people outside the regions perceived them”. “The major role of the media is to change the notion of citizens from poverty and helplessness to a region of seen opportunities through challenges,” he said.
 Pledging the support of government to the Upper East Region journalists, the Regional Minister urged them to make paradigm shift from solely reporting of events to educating and sensitizing the underprivileged communities particularly Persons With Disabilities (PWDs) on their rights and responsibilities and to involve them in the  development processes.
 He said media-communities engagements would unearth various cultural beliefs and practices that hindered development for appropriate institutions to take actions.
 Expressing his gratitude to the organizers of the programme and the renowned journalists for their visit to the Region, the Minister appealed to the media to assist to educate land owners to release their lands for investments as well as network effectively to confront social challenges in the three regions.
 Welcoming the participants, the Upper East Regional Chairman of the Ghana Journalists Association, (GJA) Mr Eric Kwadjo Amoh called on journalists to focus on issues that would bring about poverty reduction, improved education and expose the urgent needs of the people for the appropriate agencies to address them.
 Reverend Eastwood Anaba, Founder of the Eastwood Anaba Ministries, emphasized on the need for duty bearers to recognize that the Northern, Upper East and the Upper West Regions were separate regions, each with its own unique potentials and needs and therefore clustering them as one and calling them three northing regions was wrong.
 He called on government, duty bearers and media practitioners to avoid merging the three regions as one, because it marginalized the attention and benefits the three regions could access to develop their areas.
 Mr Manase Azuure charged Journalists not to sacrum to pressure in pursuing wrong in society and said investigative journalism was not the preserve of some individuals but the collective work that needed networking to succeed, and urged Journalists in the three regions to diverse the news reporting to include ones that would challenge duty bearers to do the right things.
 Mr Anas Aremeyaw Anas, the award winning undercover journalist urged journalists in the three regions to go beyond routine reporting to unearthing issues that would propel development.
 He said undercover reporting would put duty bearers on their toes to enhance development within the three regions, because it was an ideal method in the journalism profession that could expose ills such as corruption, mismanagement of funds and abuse of human rights in society."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"221"	2018-01-13	"General Secretary of the opposition, National Democratic Congress (NDC), Johnson Asiedu Nketia has brought to light the fact that in order for the Special Prosecutor to act effectively, the Right to Information Bill has to be passed.
In an interview with Ghanaweb TV, Mr Nketia disclosed that in order to prosecute people especially those in the sitting government, there must be a way of finding equal access to information; “When you want to do things differently, to prosecute people in government when they are in government, we must find a way of having equal access to information in government.”
He continued by saying that previous governments can be prosecuted since the present government may possess all documents pertaining to information needed but on the other hand, the past government cannot prosecute the present government because information pertaining to their prosecution is accessible to those in power is accessible to them only. “Because when you are prosecuting people of a past government, you are now in government so you have access to all the information in the government books but prosecuting current members of government, nobody else has access to information apart from the sitting government.\"
He therefore called on the need for the passage of RTI Bill; “That is why wherever you have the special prosecutor thing, you must have the freedom of information law in the first place for other people who are not in government to access information that will help you to proceed against people who are currently in government so that they cannot cover information and hide information from parliament, and from individuals and from anti-corruption institutions.”
The General Secretary of the NDC added that if the bill is fast-tracked it would display Government’s preparedness to fight corruption; “So I expect the government to re-introduce the bill quickly and let it pass even if it has to go under Certificate of Urgency, it has to be fast tracked so that we will be convinced about the preparedness and the resolve of the government to deal with corruption. If it ends like this and there is no freedom of information law, it will compromise the effectiveness of the Special Prosecutor.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"222"	2018-01-04	" Executive Secretary of the Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA) , Sulemana Braimah, has said the National Democratic Congress (NDC) administration under Former President John Dramani Mahama was not interested in transparency and did not want to fight corruption, hence the refusal to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
 His comment comes on the heels of claims by the General Secretary of the NDC, Johnson Asiedu Nketia, that the Special Prosecutor will be ineffective without the passage of the RTI Bill.
 Mr Nketia said on Asempa FM’s Ekossi Sen on Wednesday 3 January 2018 that: “The government must ensure the passage of the RTI bill if it is serious in fighting against corruption. The Bill when passed will enable everybody especially the media to ask questions from duty bearers on happenings in the country. What is the use of the Special Prosecutor without the RTI law?”
 But commenting on these remarks on his Facebook page, Mr Braimah said: “The General Secretary of the main opposition NDC, Asiedu Nketiah, is advocating for the passage of the RTI Bill into law. He describes a RTI law as being more important to the fight against corruption than the law backing the setting up of the office of the special prosecutor.
 “I agree with him (but) why didn't his NDC government pass the RTI Bill while it was in power for 8 years? Well, the reason is simple: The NDC government was not interested in fighting corruption and didn't want to be transparent to the people.
 “The last minute attempt to pass the Bill on the last day of the previous parliament was just some camouflage. But is the NPP truly committed to the fight against corruption? If Yes, then let the RTI Bill be passed into law. Simple.”"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"223"	2017-12-04	"Senior Minister, Yaw Osafo Maafo, has disclosed that the Right to Information (RTI) Bill is still not ready to be passed into law.
He explained that cabinet’s subcommittee on governance is yet to give cabinet feedback on the progress made in relation to the passing of the RTI Bill.
He made this disclosure at the launch of the National Anti-Corruption and Transparency week at the La Palm Royal Beach hotel.
“A draft paper was given to cabinet and it was referred to the subcommittee on governance to look at the Right to Information Bill. To the best of my knowledge, we have not gotten feedback from that subcommittee. It means they are working some details on it. This will make sure that when it comes to the whole plenary; when it comes before cabinet, it is ready to go to Parliament,” the Senior Minster said.
Mr. Osafo Maafo promised to quicken the process by ‘pushing’ the committee to ensure that cabinet gets the ‘job done’.
“We are at the committee stage and I think since we have talked about it, I am going to push the committee to make sure that Cabinet gets it done,” he added. 
When questioned on the delay in passing the RTI Bill, the Senior Minister argued that the process was more complicated, compared to the appointment of a Special Prosecutor.
“The passing of the RTI is far more complicated than the appointment of the Special Prosecutor Bill,” he stated."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"224"	2017-11-16	"On Tuesday November 14, 2017, Parliament of Ghana did a Yeoman’s job by passing the special prosecutor Bill. 
The Bill requires a presidential assent to operationalize the prosecution of alleged corrupt officials through the office of the special prosecutor. 
Besides, “Ghana’s Parliament has approved a bill that will make the spouse and children of Major Maxwell Mahama the state’s responsibility” (Source: myjoyonline.com, November 10, 2017). The Major Maxwell Mahama Bill could have been tailored to cover other widows who lost their husbands while on national assignments. 
It seems parliament is on the bill passage mission now! However, forbidden fruit they say is the sweetest! Ghana law makers have almost invariably remained obdurate to the passage of Right to information (RTI) Bill. Some of us are curious to know what is making RTI bill forbidden. Without the RTI Act the special prosecutor is destined to fail.
Democracy travels on the wheels of probity, accountability and translucency. This is because democratic constitutions enjoin the citizens to be partakers of governing process. Access to information will not only help the citizens to know governmental deals and policies but will equally mirror the salient features of rule of law and democracy.  
Over the years in Ghana, high corruption perception index is an open secret. No individual perceived to be corrupt could be prosecuted without convincing evidence. When in opposition, political leaders’ conviction on RTI Act had been pellucid only to shelve those ambitions upon grabbing the reins of political power. The passage of RTI bill will enhance the work of the independence special prosecutor. 
In elsewhere India, the 2005 RTI Act was aimed among other things at curbing corruption at the government departments, improving performance of government through accountability, promoting transparency in the operations of public institutions and to create a healthy synergy between government and its public institutions. Why can our leaders not pass RTI bill? 
Already, the ministry of Justice and Attorney General department, Economic and Organized Crime Office (EOCO), Criminal investigation department (CID), Bureau of National Investigation (BNI) are not privy to relevant information to enable them work effectively. 
The RTI Bill will offer Ghanaians access to information unless those records are contrary to public interest. The office of the special prosecutor although essential, could be somewhat malfunctional like EOCO, CID, BNI and Attorney General’s Department in nipping corruption menace in the bud without the passage of RTI bill.
What will be the composition of the office of the special prosecutor? Who appoints the special prosecutor and how neutral could the prosecutor be? Can the prosecutor deal with the rulings party’s appointees without fear or favor? I believe the real commitment to fight corruption must begin with RTI bill passage rather than special prosecutor bill. 
An office of the special prosecutor without the RTI is a mere semblance of commitment to fight corruption. Parliament must quickly pass RTI to complement the office of independent special prosecutor. God Bless Our Homeland Ghana."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"225"	2017-11-11	" I have always disagreed with the popular view that brands all politicians as liars. But I confess it is becoming extremely difficult for me to take any politician by his word. I still think, sincerely, there are a few who see political leadership as service to the people rather than as a game and only for their private gain.
 There is one small piece of law that needs to be passed on the back of provisions of the Constitution including article 21 (f) to properly empower and detail how people can access information on what is done with their tax money, etc.
 It will help them properly lawfully question how things done on their behalf are actually done and also equip them to do their article 41 (f) duty requiring them “to protect and preserve public property and expose and combat misuse and waste of public funds and property.”
 But what our leaders have done since the start of this Fourth Republic has been to promise to pass the Right To Information Law. The John Kufour regime spoke about it. The John Mills regime took it to Parliament but never passed it. The John Mahama regime returned it to Parliament, he personally pledged even before the international community that it would be passed and Speaker Doe Adjaho told us same. Candidate Akufo-Addo said he will pass it.
 Vice President Dr. Bawumia in January 2017 said he would have RTI passed within the first 100 days if he could. In July 2017, President Akufo-Addo repeated his claim commitment to pass it. The Bill is back in Parliament and you have heard the lame excuses given by leaders as to the delay in passing something that has long been a ready-made product.
 Surprisingly or rather unsurprisingly the Bill is not part of bills tabled for the final session of Parliament this year. See? Civil Society and especially the media which should be giving priority pressure has gone to sleep and left this job to the RTI Coalition.
 My Take this morning  is to fully adopt and share with you a statement by OccupyGhana demanding timelines for the passage of the RTI Bill. Here it is: OCCUPYGHANA®? PRESS STATEMENT
 OCCUPYGHANA®? DEMANDS OUTLINE FOR PASSAGE OF THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL OccupyGhana®? is deeply concerned that there do not appear to be any clear or discernible plans to pass the Right to Information Bill into law. Despite numerous Government assurances that the Bill will be passed “this year,” “very soon” or in the “next session” of Parliament, no clear timetable has emerged.
 The inexcusably long delay by successive governments under the Fourth Republican Constitution to pass this law suggests to us that governments are simply afraid to pass a law that will help actualise a right that the Constitution has already given to Ghanaians. Unless and until the law is passed, Ghanaians are entitled to conclude that governments will seek any and every excuse to defer the passage of this law for as long as possible.
 OccupyGhana®? is gratified that the courts have held that the right to information does not require an Act of Parliament to be exercised. Yet there remain substantive and procedural impediments to the exercise of this right. The current ‘default’ position of government departments is to either refuse or simply not answer any request for information. This forces citizens to go to court every time they seek to exercise that right. This is unacceptable and has to be addressed to ensure a straightforward and low cost system for the public to be able to enforce requests for information.
 OccupyGhana®? therefore demands from the government and Parliament, a clear timetable for the passage of this law. This timetable should take cognisance of the commendable public engagement process for the Office of Special Prosecutor Bill, and set firm dates by which:
 1. the government will publish and gazette the Bill;
 2. the Bill shall be tabled for debate in Parliament and
 3. the Parliamentary Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary affairs shall conclude its deliberations on the Bill. OccupyGhana®? expects that the Bill, when passed into law, will set out the clear parameters and instances where the government will exercise public interest privilege (this is the privilege that allows government to refuse the disclosure of a document or information which is against the public interest.) The current wide-bound interpretation of the government on this privilege is, in our view, the greatest substantive and procedural hurdle to the full realisation of the right to information. Any law that does not deal with this matter in a manner that eases the right to information would be worthless and not have been worth the wait.
 OccupyGhana®? proposes that the mechanism of a truly Independent Commissioner with the power to determine disputes over public interest privilege would be the single most straightforward means of resolving any current impasse over this issue. An Information Commissioner using a highly simplified and swift process with limited scope for hearings and procedural delays would address concerns about the conflict between public disclosure and privilege. Any disputes over the Commissioner’s determination may be resolved by the Court, on narrow grounds akin to judicial review.
 In conclusion, the continued delay in passing this Bill, which is now 18 years old, cannot and should not be accepted one jot further by the Ghanaian people.
 Yours, for God & Country,
 OccupyGhana
 Samson Lardy ANYENINI
 November 11, 2017"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"226"	2017-10-16	"The Right to Information Coalition (RTI Coalition) Ghana has urged diplomats at the United Nations Universal Periodic Review (UN-UPR) Pre-session in Geneva, Switzerland, to make recommendations to Ghana to pass the RTI Bill when Ghana appears before the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) next month for the 3rd review of its human rights record.
The call was made during a presentation made to the UN Permanent Missions in Geneva on Tuesday, October 10th by the Human Rights NGO Forum, of which the Coalition is a member. The NGO Forum noted that even though Ghana had made significant progress in implementing some of the recommendations made by the diplomats in 2012, a lot still remains to be done by Ghana to ensure compliance with its obligations under various regional and international laws.
A statement issued by the Coalition said: “Ghana had accepted recommendations made by the Canada and Austria during the country’s review in 2012 for the passage of the RTI law, but till date, Ghana has not complied with this recommendation. Members of the Coalition who were present in Geneva used the opportunity to engage individual missions and presented them with factsheets of the current right to information regime in Ghana and why the Government of Ghana needs to hasten the passage of the RTI Bill. Some of the Permanent Missions engaged include the USA, Germany, Haiti and Denmark. The one on one engagement was to ensure that these missions make specific recommendations for Ghana to pass the RTI Bill currently before Cabinet, into law.
“The advocacy for the passage of the RTI Bill has been on-going for over a decade; all efforts to get government, both past and present, to pass the legislation have not yielded the required result. The Bill was thoroughly reviewed and amended by the previous Parliament (6th Parliament), but the 6th Parliament could not pass the Bill into law until it lapsed in 2017 following the 2016 elections. Presently, the Bill has reverted to cabinet and from January 2017 till date, cabinet is yet to approve for the Bill to be tabled before the 7th Parliament, which is currently sitting for its last session for the year 2017.
“Ghana is expected to present a report in November 2017 to the UNHRC with updates on the state of human rights in the country and the status of implementation of previous recommendations received and accepted by the Government of Ghana, including the country’s efforts to ensure the passage of the RTI legislation.''"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"227"	2017-10-04	" Looooong Lege, you be Ogboo. Charle I land ooo, ma landi.
 From the land of the Nambia creator (aka Donald Trump) all through to the ‘in-it’ of the Queen, I borger come. Massa gyae, ayigbe slangs na ba rough!
 Naabu C, I read your letter on my way out and it was clear you were committed to destroying any joy in my trip. It was like that moment when you use your last nokofio to buy some chibom and just when you were about to impale your teeth into its yummy flesh, village flies make it their resting place. How so annoying? My anger could not make me read twice. I decided to assume you never wrote it but this Ghana konkonsa people keep leaking our letters and we meet them everywhere we go.
 I must admit I find no brightness in the day to write you this letter. LLNC, your letter quaked me. My worst fears now seem plausible. As a matter of fact, we have been used to Munchendiology created around a seemingly legitimate act. We bloat things like Pentecostal waste bins, road contracts etc. As for this one di33, chai I could not stand it. How could a Ghanaian sworn under oath to protect the interest of State, so fraudulently create a non-existing solution to a legitimate problem and proceed to award contracts to practically one MUNCHENDIOLOGIST? Ei bei!
 I agree true service is practically dead but wonder when conscience died so quickly in Ghana? The persons involved do church and mosque most Sundays and Fridays but all that show of faith means nothing to their morals and heart. What will be most significant is what Olu does about it. Will it be another old wives tale or sure proof that if you go to bed with an itchy behind, you will wake up with smelly fingers. They better wake up with their smelly fingers. With all I see these days, I wonder if they will.
 I will tell you why.
 I have just discovered that there is a supergroup of Munchendiologists. There are the Umbrella Covered, Elephant Riding Munchendiologists. You may simply call them the ULCER-Munchendiologists. Their Munchendiological acts cross carpets with finesse. They have become untouchables.
 One thing that continues to baffle me is how and why information mainly leaks when there is a change in Government? If there is one thing Munchendiology fears, it is openness which we gain from unrestricted access to information. It is for this reason that the right to information bill ought to be passed to provide a framework for operationalising the right of we-the-people to information as guaranteed in the Constitution.
 It is unbelievable that politicians have paid lip service to the bill for seventeen years, yes one-seven (17yrs). Our right to information as I recall MB and you once told me, is firmly guaranteed in the Constitution under the general fundamental freedoms of all, precisely Article 21. The Right to Information Bill, as comprehensively revised, is expected to provide an operable framework and a comparatively affordable environment for we-the-people to exercise our rights as enshrined in the Constitution. I must admit it may not be a perfect law but it is a start. Eiii! I better be careful, knowing this your too-known life, if I continue to veer into your territory, I will soon turn into prey for your dinner. You take no prisoners. Long Lege, you that.
 Reviewing the timeline below, one thing strikes me. Successive governments seem to pretend to be committed to the passage of the Bill. As I see it, politics and the rhetoric of the RTI commitment is like a mystical door; the opposition clamours for its opening while those in power use ‘Russian Tactics’ to keep it closed. Amazingly, when the opposition gets in the door, they do not hesitate to learn to shut the door too. Ei bei! Ibi disease or Tukpe?
 It is unthinkable how and why public officials flaunt what they see as their discretion not to share information. You know their favourite lines right: it is confidential, I am under oath, it is classified or simply I won’t/can’t give it to you.
 The most amazing story I heard last week was the police telling a complainant who wanted a copy of her own statement that it was confidential!
 My own statement has become confidential against me. Ei! Asem wor OluKrom! Public officials ought to know that they are just like housemaids to whom we have entrusted our children while we work our butts to raise funds to pay them. Can you imagine returning home and asking them for your daughter’s score card only for them to tell you it is confidential? How dare them?
 We-the-people are owners of the state and must assert our place in the State. The Constitution I believe is clear on this; ‘The Sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of Ghana in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of government are to be exercised … ‘. Though I rant with so much vim at public officials and politicians, I must admit they are easily a reflection of who the average Ghanaian is; we do not like accountability but are quick to demand one.
 The officials and politicians emerge from us-the- people.
 It is, therefore, necessary that while we scream for a change we so desire, we must start to live the change ourselves.
 The fake game played by successive Governments and Parliaments evidences the fact that the Elected have become disconnected from the Electorates. They seem to be playing us for the protection of their extreme NOCTURNAL Deeds. Seems like I smell the protection of MUNCHENDIOLOGY.
 I am, however, hopeful that Olu will deliver. He has been a lead advocate for human rights, freedom and justice. He has no reason to fail us on the passage of this bill. It will be a big scandal if he fails. I wish him Godspeed.
 Wait a minute!
 The success of this bill hinges on the effective maintenance and management of records. ‘Abi’ to exercise the right to information, the information must first be available. What if public officials and politicians tell you it is missing, they know nothing about it or they cannot find the file or docket?Chai! If we have no criminal provisions to ensure that officials honour their obligations to keep the state’s information safe and available, we just may have wasted time, no? In fact, it will be a Sad Distin!
 Yours truly,
 Efo Koshi
 PS: I hear they are looking for me. Just tell them their ‘horse is running fast’ (Ponkor pe ntem) or simply say I am the noisy petrol guy. Akpe!"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"228"	2017-09-27	"Chief Executive Officer of the Chamber of Bulk Oil Distributors, Senyo Hosi, has challenged President Akufo-Addo to pass the Right to Information bill in order to avoid any embarrassment during his administration.
This call to action was made during the commemoration of the International Day for Universal Access to Information, organized by the Coalition on the Right to Information at the International Press Centre.
“It will be a big embarrassment for the current government, and I daresay H.E Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, it will be the biggest embarrassment for him if he fails to ensure that the Right to Information bill is passed. Because he has been an advocate for transparency. He has been an advocate for democracy. He has been an advocate for human rights”, he posited.
He challenged the president to show Ghanaians his true colours and not throw dust into the eyes of Ghanaians. 
“I don’t hope that he will wait for it to get to his last year and then he passes it in hope that if he goes into opposition, he can now use that against those in power. Not at all. He should pass it now. Let’s have it now and let us see it have the right effects through his tenure and that is through commitment to the rights of the people”, he suggested.
The Right to Information bill has been subject to several parliamentary deliberations since the year 2000. A number of pressure groups have called on government to initiate the passage of the bill into law.
Earlier at a summit in the USA, President Akufo-Addo reiterated his administration’s commitment to ensuring the RTI Bill was passed. 
In a speech read on his behalf, the President said “my government intends to pass the Right to Information Bill into law very soon. We know that transparency protects officials and the public in the dealing with the public purse. The public has the right to know what politicians and the public officials do in their name,”.
The enactment of the Bill into law will make it easier for Ghanaians to seek and obtain information from the various government sectors."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"229"	2017-08-20	"The passion with which the President speaks about his commitment to fight corruption is sometimes enough to turn his bitterest enemies into lovers for a moment. 
But sadly, it is not the first time Ghanaians are hearing their President speak so passionately against corruption. It is also not the first time they are hearing their president make bold statements of a commitment to fight the canker. It’s not new at all. 
Previous Presidents in the Fourth Republic had made similar, if not even more audacious pronouncements and declarations of commitment to fight corruption. But they all ended up failing the test. For those who may have forgotten, a few reminders of similar talk-talk about corruption by President Akufo-Addo’s predecessors under the Fourth Republic may be useful. 
Let’s start with the man who began the Fourth Republic, Jerry John Rawlings. President Rawlings as a military ruler didn’t just talk about fighting corruption, he openly executed people on grounds of corruption. When Mr. Rawlings became a civilian leader from 1993, he still spoke vehemently against corruption and many believed him. 
But what happened? Corruption thrived under Jerry Rawlings even if not as prevalent as in later regimes. In 1996, the Commission for Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) found some of Mr. Rawlings’ top ministers guilty of corruption. What did Mr. Rawlings do? He wrote a white paper to clear the ministers who had been found guilty by CHRAJ. 
In 1998, it was reported that Mr. Rawlings had received an amount of $5million from the then dictator in Nigeria, General Sani Abacha. At the time, Mr. Rawlings remained silent over the matter. Officials of his government relentlessly denied story. Last year (18 years after the story), Mr. Rawlings then confessed that he received money from the former Nigerian dictator. 
Corruption under Rawlings may not have involved the ‘stealing’ of colossal sums of money as in the case under subsequent regimes. But that may just be because corruption at the time had to be commensurate with the size of the economy. 
Then came President John Agyekum Kufuor. Mr. Kufuor’s victory in the 2000 polls was partly due to widely-held perception of increasing corruption under the Rawlings regime. So, unsurprisingly, President Kufuor assumed power on January 7, 2001 promising a policy of zero tolerance for corruption. 
But not too long into the Kufour regime, reports of corruption started dominating the headlines. These included the then Chairman of the President’s New Patriotic Party (NPP), who was heard on a leaked audiotape alleging acts of corruption against the President. 
There were several other reports of acts of corruption by several appointees of President Kufour. No sanctions were meted out by the administration against such appointees. President Kufour eventually told Ghanaians that corruption started from days of Adam – a clear admission of his failure in the anti-corruption fight. 
Next on the list of Presidential Johns, was John Evans Atta Mills who defeated Nana Akufo-Addo (current President) in the 2008 polls. President Mills’ campaign largely focused on corruption and he won the polls mainly because of his promise to fight corruption. 
President Mills was trusted by many at the beginning. But he soon became a disappointment in the fight against corruption.  Cases of fraudulent payments of judgement debts and other scandals became rampant. 
His Attorney General, Mr. Martin Amidu, decided to fight against the looting but he would not be allowed to do so. Sooner than later, Amidu became frustrated by the deliberate schemes by the Mills administration to prevent him from fighting corruption in the system. The only option available to him was to resign, and uncharacteristic of a Ghanaian Minister, Amidu resigned. 
But before Amidu’s resignation could be known by the public, the government issued a statement announcing Amidu’s dismissal. Out of government, Amidu was unperturbed and decided to continue his fight against corrupt acts under the Mills administration. He pursued the anti-corruption fight gallantly and won admirably. 
Then came Mills’ Vice President, the fourth and last John in the series of Presidential Johns, John Dramani Mahama. President Mahama was sworn into office as President on July 24, 2012 after the sudden death of President Mills. He went on to win the Presidential elections in December that year for a four-year term. 
As incumbent President and second-in-command under Atta Mills, President Mahama could not have campaigned in the 2012 polls on fighting corruption. Doing that would have meant an acknowledgment of corruption in his government or that of President Mills, under which he served as Vice President. When he assumed office, President Mahama, like the Johns before him, vowed to fight corruption. As if to prove President Kufour right that corruption started from Adam, there seemed to have been an outbreak of corruption epidemic during Mahama regime. Corruption was not only tolerated, it was incentivised. 
Under President Mahama, it appeared all one needed to do was to have a good plan to steal from the state and going ahead to do so. If one was caught in the process of stealing or after it, the punishment was to refund the loot, and even that, the refund will be based on negotiated repayment terms. It’s still too soon for one to forget about the GYEEDA, SADA, SUBA, bus branding among other acts of corruption under the Mahama regime.
 So quite clearly, President Akufo-Addo’s promise and statements of commitment to fight corruption is not new. Previous Presidents did same but they all failed the test in the end. So, for now, the records of Presidential Promise-and-fail as far as the fight against corruption is concerned, vindicate sceptics of President Akufo-Addo’s anti-corruption rhetoric. 
So far, President Akufo-Addo has said or done nothing new and different from his predecessors as far as the fight against corruption is concerned. At this stage, if there is any reason to believe that President Akufo-Addo will be different from his predecessors on the anti-corruption battle, it may just simply be because he is not another John. 
But President Akufo-Addo has an opportunity to pass the anti-corruption test. More than ever before, Ghanaians are prepared to join the President to fight the canker. All that Ghanaians are looking for is the enabling legal framework that will empower them to fully and effectively take part in the fight against corruption. That enabling legal framework is the Right to Information (RTI) Law. 
The current leadership of both sides in Parliament and majority of members of the current parliament have been part of the previous parliament that discussed the RTI Bill. But for the opposition from the then monitory NPP (now the majority) members of Parliament, the RTI bill would have been passed in the final days of the last parliament. 
There cannot be any potent law or framework that can propel the fight against corruption than the RTI law. The fight against corruption cannot be by the government alone. It is a fight that must involve all citizens. Having an RTI law is the answer. 
So, let President Akufo-Addo push for the speedy passage of the RTI law to prove the cynics of his anti-corruption stance wrong. President Akufo-Addo has a great opportunity to make a mark on the fight against corruption. Will he grab the opportunity now? We wait to see."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"230"	2017-07-30	"Notwithstanding the code of ethics that abhors corruption in government organizations, it is almost becoming normal for public servants to engage in corrupt practices in the discharge of their duties. Succeeding governments in Ghana have been fighting corruption in government bodies.
However, a cursory survey in all the important government agencies like the Passport Office, the Driver Vehicle and Licensing Authority [DVLA], Registrar General’s Department, hospitals and clinics among many bodies shows that corruption is still prevalent there. A visit to the above named offices would reveal the presence of “goro boys” and huge contractors hanging around, transacting businesses to process documents on behalf of other people. They don’t provide these services for nothing.
The common justification given by those offering bribes using middle men in these outfits is that they require rapid services to be rendered to them in the three main offices which are centralized in Accra and require to offer services for thousands of people travelling down from all parts of the country.
They therefore see nothing wrong with offering bribes to get their hearts desirers. Decentralizing government agencies like Passport Office, DVLA, Registrars General’s Office etc. in all the ten regions of Ghana is therefore the way to go. To this end succeeding governments have intended to push through decentralization programs in all regions and districts. It seems to be working to some extent. However, we are yet to see it happening in full swing. One other way of ensuring fast and easy processing of documents in government office is through mechanization of all government offices. This method of pushing through documents is reported to have been adopted but it is yet to be widespread and effective.
Although a mad rush for services in government offices is responsible for offer of bribes in government offices, some Ghanaians say bribery is normal in consonance with our customs and traditions in which “libation pouring” is normal. While some people say it is customary to offer gifts for services, others say that would induce government officers in organizations including hospitals and clinics to pay attention to them.
Secret corrupt practices also happen during procurement involving top government officials and foreign,local contractors and suppliers.
There are government officials including those at the very top echelon of offices who make huge money through bribery enough for them to buy cars and put up buildings. This means that those officials accept government jobs in lucrative government organizations in order to enrich themselves through bribery and other private duties, but not to serve the nation.
The former Member of Parliament for North Dayi Constituency in the Volta Region, George Loh, has hit at public sector workers who transact private businesses instead of what they have been mandated to do in their various offices. For us bribery andcorruption in government bodies amounts to using governments outfits for private undertakings and gain.
He contended: “we only pay people to go and sit in the offices and they do their private things and go away but are paid at the end of the month by the government of Ghana”.
A research published by a reliable source has shown that Corruption in Ghana has been common since independence. Since 2006, Ghana's score and ranking on the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index has improved slightly, ranking higher than Italy and Brazil.However, there is a growing perception in Ghana that government-related corruption is on the rise, ranked 64th in 2012, tied with Lesotho. Even though corruption in Ghana is relatively low when compared to other countries in Africa, businesses frequently quote corruption as an obstacle for doing business in the country. Corruption occurs often in locally funded contracts; companies are subject to bribes when operating in rural areas.
In a book published in 1975 by Victor T. Le Vine,bribery, theft and embezzlement arose from reversion to a traditional winner-takes-all attitude in which power and family relationships prevailed over the rule of law. Corruption in Ghana which has led to many government officials being found wanting is comparatively less prevalent than in other countries in the region though.Although winner takes all is not preferable by many people in Ghana, that alone cannot be responsible for massive corruption in the system.
Ghana is not a signatory to the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery. It has, however, taken steps to amend laws on public financial administration and public procurement. The public procurement law, passed in January 2004, seeks to harmonize the many public procurement guidelines used in the country and also to bring public procurement into conformity with World Trade Organization standards. The new law aims to improve accountability, value for money, transparency and efficiency in the use of public resources.It is our hope that the appointment of minister in charge of procurement would help matters.
However, some civil society organizations have criticized the law as inadequate. Civil society representatives, have drafted the Right to Information bill, which after being passed by parliament will allow greater access to public information on government transactions.The passage of the RTI bill is important because notwithstanding the new procurement law, there may continue to be fear of corruption in the tender process. The RTI law would therefore lead to transparency and accountability in government transactions and to lead to the elimination of corrupt practices in government circles.
By Alhaji Alhasan Abdulai
Executive Director eanfoworld for sustainable development"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"231"	2017-06-16	"The US Ambassador to Ghana, Robert P. Jackson has pledged the commitment of the US to help Ghana fight child trafficking.
In that regard, he said, the US was committing a $5 million grant over a period of four years to fight the phenomenon. The US, he said, was also ready to use its expertise to investigate human trafficking cases in Ghana.
He made the promise on Thursday June 15 when he paid a courtesy call on the Minister for Information, Mustapha Abdul-Hamid in Accra.
On the Broadcasting bill, Ambassador Jackson said broadcasting had changed considerably since the advent of Ghana’s fourth republic, lauding the Ministry of Information’s commitment to seeing to the passage of the broadcasting bill into law by end the year. He added US was ready to build the capacity of Ghanaian journalists in US media institutions.
The two, discussed wide range of issues including, Right to Information Bill, Broadcasting Bill, Millennium Challenge Corporation on energy, US Peace Corps and Defence Corporation.
Briefing the Ambassador, Hon. Abdul-Hamid said government was committed to passing the Right to Information bill into law by the end of this year to help in the fight against corruption.
The Minister stressed that the Ministries of Information and Justice and Attorney General, who were co-sponsors of the bill, were very keen on getting the RTI bill passed this year. According to him, the Attorney General was particularly confident that the RTI was a key ingredient in fighting corruption, adding that the bill would, “introduce better transparency into our governance.”
The Minister also assured that the Broadcasting and Advertising Bills would equally be passed into laws, emphasising for instance that “right now there is a huge debate in our country about three Television stations”, telecasting some obscene material in the night, “and there is no law that prohibit them from doing so…therefore the National Media Commission has informed me that even if they were to go to court to prohibit the television stations from doing it, they might not succeed. Making it more important to pass the broadcasting law in order to sanitise the media environment and get our democracy in better shape.”
On the Millennium Challenge Corporation, Mr. Abdul-Hamid agreed that there was some misinformation on its implementation in response to Mr Jackson earlier complaint that there was a lot of misinformation about the compact and therefore called for coordination of information between the Ministry and the US Embassy.
According to the Minister, the Ministry of Energy had been clarifying the initial fear that the compact was a complete takeover of the Electricity Company of Ghana, adding however that there was more to be done to bring clarity to the issue.
“The Millennium Challenge Corporation will invest up to $498.2 million to transform Ghana’s power sector and stimulate private investment. The aim of the five-year Ghana Power Compact is to create a financially viable power sector to meet the current and future needs of households and businesses, and to help fight poverty across the country,” the MCC has posted on its website.
Touching on US defence cooperation, Ambassador Jackson allayed the panic that the US was planning to set up military base in Ghana. He explained that US had defence cooperation with a number of countries; hence, the US military undertakes a lot of military exercise around the globe including Ghana.
As part of US-Ghana relations, US Peace Corps Volunteers have been visiting Ghana since 1961 to serve in the educational, health and agricultural sectors but their activities were not well known.
Ambassador Jackson therefore indicated that the US embassy was planning to move their swearing-in ceremony from the eastern region to Accra to where there is more media exposure."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"232"	2017-05-28	"Journalists and citizens who eagerly anticipated the presentation of the RTI bill to parliament for scrutiny and passage would have to wait till the third sitting of the 7th parliament for any hope of its passage.
The Bill which when passed will give live to Article 21(1)(f) of the constitution which states that “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualification and laws as are necessary in a democratic society” has been in parliament for more than a decade.
The RTI Bill was drafted in 1999 and reviewed in 2003, 2005 and 2007 but was not presented to Parliament. 
The first attempt at enacting the law on the right to information was made when the Bill was presented to Parliament on February 5, 2010.
However speaking to www.ghanaweb.com, the Acting Director of Public Affairs, Parliament, Kate Addo she explained that Parliament has the luxury of time before its tenure ends therefore there is the possibility of it being passed at some point.
“This is only the second meeting of the first sessions. We have four sessions to go and we have three meetings in each session. We are expecting that at some point in the life of the 7th parliament it will be reintroduced, the leaders and various actors have indicated their interest in saying the Bills passed” she said.
She also added that unlike previous parliaments, the leaders and the key stakeholders involved have expressed willingness to ensure that the bill is passed during the lifespan of the 7th parliament.
She was emphatic that even though the Bill will be reintroduced, it will not be unduly delayed if presented to plenary as the actors remain the same and more committed to it.
“When it is reintroduced, there’s a lot of work already which is going to inform how it is conducted this time and hopefully it will be passed. There is a lot of political from both sides of the divide to ensure that it will be passed and so we are keeping our fingers crossed and hoping that it will be passed as soon as possible.” she noted 
The enactment of the Bill into law will make it easier for individuals to seek and obtain information.
In the last hour of the erstwhile administration, attempts were made to pass the bill into law but to no avail as both sides of the house couldn’t agree on the content of the bill. 
Parliament reconvenes on Tuesday May 30th 2017 after breaking for the Easter in April, 2017."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"233"	2017-05-05	"A Deputy Minister of Information Kojo Oppong–Nkrumah has said the soon-to-be passed Right to Information Bill is designed to benefit the general public and is not focused on press freedom alone.
He said the law will seek to provide members of the public with information to empower them towards improved participation in the democratic process.
“Freedom of the Press is enshrined in Article 12 of the constitution and the right to free media is not indicted. The right to free media is not hindered in any way in the absence of the law. Neither will its passage mean the Ghanaian media will be necessarily free or independent than it is today,” Mr. Oppong-Nkrumah who is also Member of Parliament for Ofoase-Ayirebi noted in an interview with GTV.
“A lot of people think that this bill will open the gate for some kind of secret information to pop up without much work. Instead the law if passed will provide all persons in Ghana a procedure by which they can access the already existent Right to Information as provided in Article 21(1) (f) of the constitution,” he explained.
He further stated government is working towards improving the already existing drafts to build stronger Public Affairs Units in the Ministries, Departments and Agencies to deliver on information requests that will come when the new bill is passed.
According to Mr. Oppong-Nkrumah, the government believes that the Bill has gone through numerous consultation processes and is ready to be passed by July.
The Right to Information Bill was introduced in 1999 and has been laid before parliament several times over the last decade."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"234"	2017-05-03	" Majority Leader Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu has urged the media to strive hard to protect the integrity of people rather than seeking to tarnish hard-earned reputation.
 He said this in a speech read on his behalf by the Deputy Majority Leader and Minister of State in charge of Procurement, Adwoa Safo, in a ceremony to mark World Press Freedom Day in Accra on Wednesday 3 May.
 “I want to plead with you as we do our work as the media, as is guaranteed in our constitution, as we push for this bill [RTI bill] to be [passed], I believe that the hard-earned reputation of people should not be compromised.
 Because if you look in article 162, 163, 164, it also talks about the responsibility of the media. So inasmuch as we want to check everybody, let’s make sure that in doing so, we do not tarnish the hard-earned reputation of people,” he said.
 On his part, the Information Minister, Mustapha Hamid, said the long-awaited Right to Information (RTI) bill would be passed into law by Ghana’s parliament in July.
 “We were advised that once the life of a certain parliament lapses, whatever bills were before that parliament ought to be relayed because a new parliament has come into being. And so to assure you that per the calendar that we have sent to parliament, it is in there that in the May to July session of this parliament, the RTI shall be before them for debate and for passage; that is a given, it is non-negotiable,” he said.
 Meanwhile, Minority Leader Haruna Iddrisu pledged the commitment of parliament to pass the RTI and Broadcasting bills before the expiration of their tenure of office.
 He also called for the need to properly define the roles of the National Communications Authority (NCA) and the National Media Commission (NMC) with regards to who regulates the airwaves. According to him, parliament cannot continue to be in a dilemma in its quest to protect press freedom."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"235"	2017-05-03	"Major stories making headlines in today's newspapers include:
* Confusion rocks W/R NDC
* Police strips taxi driver naked
* Martin Amidu slams MPs
* Government committed to passage of RTI bill – Abdul-Hamid
* NHIS service providers send SOS to government
* Metro Mass chases NDC for GHC1.9m unpaid bus rental
* Nii Noi begs Nana
* Akufo Addo brings Dumsor back!
* Expect a baby this year - Selly
Click on the photo section of the page to get updated on all the topical issues making headlines in the newspapers."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"236"	2017-05-02	" The Minority says its members made “strenuous efforts” to have the Right To Information (RTI) Bill passed into law in the Sixth Parliament.
 That Parliament with Edward Doe Adjaho as Speaker had the current Minority as Majority and vice versa.
 In a statement to mark the 2017 International Press Freedom Day, the National Democratic Congress (NDC) legislators are blaming their opposite numbers in the immediate past House for the inability to pass the RTI bill.
 “Regrettably, it was the uncooperative and obstructionist attitude of the opposition NPP then which scuttled the passage of the Bill which in our estimation can contribute significantly to enhanced media practice.”
 It says “we would continue to push and lend the requisite support for the passage of this Bill to further widen and deepen the frontiers of free expression”.
 The International Press Freedom Day was marked in Ghana on May 3, 2017 on the theme: ‘Ghana still in search of Right to Information Law and the Broadcasting Law: is Parliament in a dilemma?’
 The Minority in the statement signed by its leader, Haruna Iddrisu, who is also Member of Parliament for Tamale South Constituency, said it will not only push for the passage of the RTI bill in the Seventh Parliament but also ensure “the passage of the broadcasting bill and for the acceleration and entrenchment of the freedom of the media as enshrined in Article 121 of the constitution”.
 The Minority also reassured the media of its readiness to partner the Fourth Estate of the Realm to put “fire” on government.
 “On this auspicious occasion, we wish to reiterate our steadfast commitment to the core governance principles of probity, transparency, truth and accountability and to accordingly urge our media partners to join hands with us to hold the feet of government to the fire of accountability.
 “This is not only enjoined on us by the constitution of our dear republic, but also a bounder and sacred duty to the millions of our hardworking and diligent people.”
 It commended the media for its efforts in throwing light “on shady or murky transactions such as the recent multimillion dollar bonds issued by the government of the New Patriotic Party which uncharacteristically was open for only a few hours with a prohibitive interest rate of 19.75% over a 15 year period”."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"237"	2017-05-02	"Information Minister Mustapha Hamid has given the assurance that the Right to Information Bill (RTI) will be passed by July this year.
According to him, the processes of parliament requires that the bill is relayed in the house, even though the previous parliament looked at it.
The RTI has been before Parliament since 2013. It is one of the oldest bills before the house. The Mahama administration promised to pass it before the expiration of its tenure but they failed to do so, with the President once claiming that he did not know the state of the bill in the house.
Speaking at a ceremony to mark  world press freedom day in Accra Wednesday, Mr. Hamid said the Akufo-Addo government will soon relay the bill before parliament.
“We were advised that once the life of a certain parliament lapses, whatever bills was before that parliament ought to be relayed because a new parliament has come into being.
“And so to assure you that per the calendar that we have sent to parliament, it is in there that in the May to July session of this parliament, the RTI shall be before them for debate and for passage; that is a given, it is non-negotiable,” he said."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"238"	2017-04-16	"Today marks exactly 100 days since the NPP, led by its leader and 2016 flagbearer, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, took over the reigns of governance from the National Democratic Congress. It was a change many had clamored for and eagerly anticipated considering the 'historic' margin of victory the NPP got in last year's polls. That margin, according to many, was a reflection of the goodwill the Akufo-Addo government was to enjoy in the coming days, but the question on the lips of many remains 'how long will the anchor hold' particularly after a series of unexpected events which many believe have overshadowed the positives of the Akufo-Addo administration in the last 100 days.
Critics of the President with bated breath, monitored keenly the President's inaugural speech during his swearing-in ceremony and when it came to light that portions of his highly acclaimed speech had been plagiarized, social media was awash with comments that would only get the international media talking about everything else but the president's plan for ensuring growth in the country's economy.
Hours later, the Director of Communications at the Presidency, Eugene Arhin, took blame for the gaffe and apologized to Ghanaians. Though some were keen on the President apologizing for 'his own sins' many more Ghanaians were of the view the admission and subsequent apology by the Director of Communications was enough. This, as we can now say, was the beginning of a rather steady but rocky ride to the 100-day benchmark."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"239"	2017-04-04	"The Coalition on the Right to Information, Ghana, has called on the Akufo-Addo-led government to expedite action towards the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
The Coalition’s call was made in a six-point resolution adopted at a general meeting held on Wednesday, March 29, 2017 at the International Press Centre to discuss the Coalition’s activities and review strategies to promote the passage of an effective Right to Information legislation in Ghana.
The Coalition decried the failure by the past administration to pass the Right to Information Bill 2016 despite all the efforts put into the review and amendment of the bill by the sixth parliament.
The Coalition also expressed concerns over the time, energy and resources that would be committed into fresh processes to enable the passage of the Bill and urged government to expedite action to enable the passage of the Bill within the first year of this administration.
The Coalition took cognisance of the promise made by the Vice President, H.E Dr Mahamudu Bawumia, at the Transparency International regional meeting in Accra in February 2017, assuring Ghanaians that the RTI Bill will be passed this year 2017 and hopes that this will not be a mere repetition of the promises made by the past administration.
The General Meeting, which had in attendance regional focal persons from nine regions of the country, also saw the swearing in of the following new members of the Steering Committee (SC) to serve for the next two years. The new SC members resolved to continue to work hard to ensure, not only the passage of the RTI Bill but also that Ghana has an effective access to information regime.
1. The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Africa office
2. The Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII)
3. The Human Rights Advocacy Centre (HRAC)
4. The Trades Union Congress (TUC), Ghana
5. Perfecter of Sentiments (POS) Foundation
6. Centre for Employment of Persons with Disability (CEPD)
7. Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition (GACC)
8. SEND-Ghana
9. Ghana Journalists Association (GJA)
10. Seth Abloso (Individual Member)
Below is the full resolution:
RESOLUTION ADOPTED AT THE GENERAL MEETING OF THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) COALITION AT THE INTERNATIONAL PRESS CENTRE, ACCRA, MARCH 29, 2017.
We the members of the Right to Information (RTI) Coalition, at the General meeting held at the International Press Centre, this Wednesday 29 March, 2017
• Having considered and adopted the Report of the Coalition's activities for the year 2016, express satisfaction at the support for the sustenance of the campaign for the passage of the RTI Bill in Ghana,
• Further express disappointment at the failure by the 6th Parliament of the 4th Republic to pass the RTI Bill, despite assurances from the Executive and the Leadership of Parliament
• Concerned about the need for the passage of the RTI Bill to enhance Democracy, Accountability and Development
• Observes that the attitude of governments towards the passage of the RTI Bill over the years has not been the best and that the tactics have been that of several promises that never materialises,
• Notes with cautious optimism, efforts so far initiated by the government of President Nana Akufo-Addo to ensure that a new RTI Bill is placed before Parliament, and
• Calls on H.E the President to ensure the early submission of the RTI Bill to Parliament for necessary action.
The Coalition renews its commitment and readiness, despite its disappointment and associated costs, to engage with and support Parliament for the early passage of the RTI Bill in Ghana."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"240"	2017-04-04	"The Coalition on the Right to Information, Ghana has called on government to expedite action towards the passage of the RTI Bill.
The Coalition’s call was made in a 6 point resolution adopted at a General meeting held on Wednesday, March 29, 2017 at the Press Centre to discuss the Coalition’s activities and review strategies to promote the passage of an effective Right to Information legislation in Ghana.
The Coalition decried the failure by the past administration to pass the Right to Information Bill 2016 despite all the efforts put into the review and amendment of the Bill by the 6th Parliament.
The Coalition also expressed concerns over the time, energy and resources that would be committed into fresh processes to enable the passage of the Bill and urged government to expedite action to enable the passage of the Bill within the first year of this administration.
The Coalition took cognisance of the promise made by the Vice President, H.E Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia at the Transparency International Regional meeting in Accra in February 2017, assuring Ghanaians that the RTI Bill will be passed this year 2017 and hopes that this will not be a mere repetition of the promises made by the past administration.
The General Meeting which had in attendance regional focal persons from 9 regions of the country also saw the swearing in of the following new members of the Steering Committee (SC) to serve for the next two years. The new SC members resolved to continue to work hard to ensure, not only the passage of the RTI Bill but also that Ghana has an effective access to information regime.
1. The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Africa office
2. The Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII)
3. The Human Rights Advocacy Centre (HRAC)
4. The Trades Union Congress (TUC), Ghana
5. Perfecter of Sentiments (POS) Foundation
6. Centre for Employment of Persons with Disability (CEPD)
7. Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition (GACC)
8. Send- Ghana
9. Ghana Journalist Association (GJA)
10. Seth Abloso (Individual Member)Below is the full resolution
RESOLUTION ADOPTED AT THE GENERAL MEETING OF THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) COALITION AT THE INTERNATIONAL PRESS CENTRE, ACCRA, MARCH 29, 2017.
We the members of the Right to Information (RTI) Coalition, at the General meeting held at the International Press Centre, this Wednesday 29 March, 2017
·        Having considered and adopted the Report of the
     Coalition’s activities for the year 2016, express
    satisfaction at the support for the sustenance of the
    campaign for the passage of the RTI Bill in Ghana,
·        Further express disappointment at the failure by the
     6th Parliament of the 4th Republic to pass the RTI Bill,
    despite assurances from the Executive and the
    Leadership of Parliament,
·      Concerned about the need for the passage of the RTI
    Bill to enhance Democracy, Accountability and
    Development,
·        Observes that the attitude of governments towards
    the passage of the RTI Bill over the years has not
    been the best and that the tactics have been that of
    several promises that never materialises,
·        Notes with cautious optimism, efforts so far initiated
     by the government of President Nana Akufo-Addo to
    ensure that a new RTI Bill is placed before Parliament,
    and
·     Calls on H.E the President to ensure the early
    submission of the RTI Bill to Parliament for necessary
    action.
The Coalition renews its commitment and readiness, despite its disappointment and associated costs, to engage with and support Parliament for the early passage of the RTI Bill in Ghana."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"241"	2017-03-20	"Think tank Odekro has criticised President Akufo-Addo over the mammoth size of his government.
President Akufo-Addo has appointed 50 ministers and 60 deputies, totalling 110. This number represents the biggest in the fourth republic, but Mr Akufo-Addo has justified the move indicating that he needs all the appointees to succeed.
Commenting on the issue Nehemiah Attigah, Project Lead for Odekro, said: “A Member of Parliament (MP) needs to be regularly present in parliament for effective representation of the interests of their constituents and to participate in parliamentary business. In our 2015 Report on Parliamentary Absenteeism, we also found that the absenteeism rates of MP-Ministers (41%) were significantly higher than the absenteeism rates of MPs without ministerial portfolios (20%).”
This was contained in a press release on Monday, March 20. The statement added that in the short term, the decision may satisfy political interests of the president but present negative ramifications for his party’s legislative agenda in the long-term.Below is the statement:
Odekro’s Statement on the President’s Appointment of 110 Ministers
Odekro is surprised and dismayed by the recent nomination of 54 additional Ministers by President Akufo-Addo. The newest list brings the total of Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Ministers of State to 110. The high number of Ministers is of great concern since 61% (67) of the Ministers and Ministers-Designate are sitting Parliamentarians.
The authority of Ghana’s Parliament has been consistently affected by Presidential appointments of the majority of Ministers from Parliament. Successive Presidents have exercised this constitutional mandate to their advantage, a trend which reaffirms the widely held view that the Ghanaian Parliament is largely a rubber stamp, “blindly defending” and approving decisions by the Executive.
A Member of Parliament needs to be regularly present in Parliament for effective representation of the interests of their constituents and to participate in Parliamentary business. In our 2015 Report on Parliamentary Absenteeism, we also found that the absenteeism rates of MP-Ministers (41%) were significantly higher than the absenteeism rates of MPs without Ministerial portfolios (20%).Weakening of Parliament’s Leadership:
We are also concerned by the large number of Ministers and Ministers-designate who are Parliamentary leaders. Thirty Eight (38) of the Ministers, representing 57% of MP-Ministers are MPs with considerable years of experience in Parliament. 
Furthermore, with the recent nomination of the current Deputy Majority Leader, Ms. Sara Adwoa Safo (NPP-Dome-Kwabenya) as Minister of State for Procurement, both the Majority and Deputy Majority Leaders will also double as Ministers. This cooptation of the NPPs Parliamentary leadership into the executive, runs contrary to the President’s own statement that ‘Our Parliament, the legislative arm of government, must grow into its proper role as an effective machinery for accountability and oversight of the Executive, and not be its junior partner’ How can the NPPs MPs be expected to hold the Executive accountable when their two most senior leaders are members of the Executive?The President may have shot himself in the foot.
The possibility of high absenteeism by MP-Ministers can effectively threaten the New Patriotic Party’s (NPP) standing majority and allow MPs in the minority National Democratic Congress (NDC) to occasionally delay votes on some important bills.
Should all 67 MP-Ministers absent themselves from Parliament and all 106 NDC MPs be present, the NDC will have more MPs in Parliament at that particular time than the NPP. (The NPP will have 102 MPs to the NDC 106). The NDC will therefore be able to block the passage of bills if the NPP is unable to whip its MPs to attend Parliament sittings due to the absenteeism of the MP-Ministers, as the NPP did when the NDC was unable to whip its MPs to pass the RTI Bill.
The NDC could also use the quorom rule to delay Parliamentary business. The quorom rule requires one third of MPs (92 of the 275) to be present for Parliament business to commence. In previous Parliaments, the NPP (then with minority seats) used the quorum rule to delay Parliamentary business on several occasions. By appointing so many MPs as Ministers, President Akufo-Addo has therefore increased the likelihood that government business in Parliament will be delayed, conducted more inefficiently and at greater cost to the public.
Finally, the President’s appointment of so many Ministers from Parliament puts his Parliamentarians at risk of losing their seats.
During the tenure of the Sixth Parliament, 45 MP-Ministers absented themselves from over 15 Parliamentary sittings at least once. Their absenteeism put them in potential breach of article 97 (1) (c) of the 1992 Constitution which states that, “A member of Parliament shall vacate his seat in Parliament if he (she) is absent without the permission in writing of the speaker and he is unable to offer reasonable explanation to the Parliamentary Committee on Privileges from 15 sittings of a meeting of Parliament during any period that Parliament has been summoned to meet and continues to meet.”
Should the NDC or a Civil Society Organisation decide to seek enforcement of this constitutional provision in the future, it is likely they will find many NPP MPs who are Ministers in breach, given the increased likelihood of their absenteeism. Even if these MPs are not forced to defend their seats through bye-elections, their reduced efficacy in Parliament may cause them to lose their seats in the 2020 elections.Conclusion
In the short term, President Akufo-Addo’s unprecedented decision may satisfy political interests but present negative ramifications for his party’s legislative agenda in the long-term. On the basis of these political appointments, the oversight responsibility of the Executive by MP-Ministers may be compromised by the Executive (Presidency) and personal business interests.
The President has acted within the remit of the 1992 constitution. But he has also acted against the sensibility of many Ghanaians. The only way to effectively resolve this political expediency is to seriously and unwaveringly push for a strict separation of the Executive and Legislative arms of government, including a reexamination of Article 78, the constitutional provision, which compels the President to appoint the majority of Ministers from Parliament.
Odekro will be keenly monitoring activities in Parliament to assess and measure MPs attendance and their effectiveness in the performance of their representative and legislative functions. The results will be publicized in the coming months.
Signed:
Nehemiah Attigah,
Project Lead, Odekro"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"242"	2017-03-03	"Finance Minister Ken Ofori-Atta has revealed that the government of Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo will pass the Right to Information (RTI) bill as a way of dealing with corruption in the public sector.
More than a decade after it was presented to Ghana's parliament, the bill has not been passed.
However, presenting the government budget to parliament on Thursday, 2 March, Mr Ofori-Atta, among other things, said: “Mr Speaker the government will pass the Right to Information bill.”
Mr Ofori-Atta also touched on the scrapping of some levies including the excise duty on petroleum products. The government also intends to reduce the special petroleum tax rate on petrol from 17.5% to 15%.
Other taxes that will be completely abolished include the following:
1. The 1% special import levy
2. The 17.5% VAT on financial services
3. The 17.5% VAT on selected imported medicines not produced locally
4. The 17.5% VAT on domestic airline tickets
5. The 5% VAT on real estate sales
6. Duty on importation of spare parts
Also, the 17.5% VAT imposed on traders has been replaced with a 3% flat rate, while businesses that employ young graduates from tertiary institutions will get tax credits and other incentives. Furthermore, there will be tax incentives for young entrepreneurs while the Corporate Income Tax will be progressively reduced from 25% to 20% in 2018.
Additionally, Mr Ofori-Atta said the Akufo-Addo government would initiate steps to remove import duties on raw materials and machinery for production."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"243"	2017-03-03	"Finance Minister Ken Ofori-Atta has revealed that the government of Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo will pass the Right to Information (RTI) bill as a way of dealing with corruption in the public sector.
More than a decade after it was presented to Ghana's parliament, the bill has not been passed.
However, presenting the government budget to parliament on Thursday, 2 March, Mr Ofori-Atta, among other things, said: “Mr Speaker the government will pass the Right to Information bill.”
Mr Ofori-Atta also touched on the scrapping of some levies including the excise duty on petroleum products. The government also intends to reduce the special petroleum tax rate on petrol from 17.5% to 15%.
Other taxes that will be completely abolished include the following:
1. The 1% special import levy
2. The 17.5% VAT on financial services
3. The 17.5% VAT on selected imported medicines not produced locally
4. The 17.5% VAT on domestic airline tickets
5. The 5% VAT on real estate sales
6. Duty on importation of spare parts
Also, the 17.5% VAT imposed on traders has been replaced with a 3% flat rate, while businesses that employ young graduates from tertiary institutions will get tax credits and other incentives. Furthermore, there will be tax incentives for young entrepreneurs while the Corporate Income Tax will be progressively reduced from 25% to 20% in 2018.
Additionally, Mr Ofori-Atta said the Akufo-Addo government would initiate steps to remove import duties on raw materials and machinery for production."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"244"	2017-02-13	" By: ALHAJI ALHASAN ABDULAI
 The conduct of the 2016 presidential and parliamentary election is held highly worldwide as very peaceful thereby improving the country’s political profile.
 Because the government of National Democratic Congress NDC led by John Mahama was defeated by the New Patriotic Party NPP the nation relied on the transitional act of parliament to move over power and state assets   from the NDC to NPP under the leadership of H.E Nana Addo Danquah Akufo Addo.
 However, the handing over process as revealed daily in the media is not smooth sailing.
 While the outgone NDC appointees provided a memo indicating the number of cars bequeathed to the NPP government the new government of NPP say the 426 vehicles that were expected to be in the presidential pool of vehicles have gone, down to 218.
 This means that just like the acting press secretary of the new government said more than 200 of the vehicles are missing. As a writer am in no position to give support to the outgone government or the new one. All I can say is that both parties need to meet as they did during the transition meetings to iron out the issues further.
 This can lead to them discovering the missing cars perhaps as some of the cars have been transferred to some government officials who bought them. If some of the cars are in the custody of other persons illegally, those cars may also be found.
 The media exchanges will continue to give us bad press and dented image locally and globally. The ruling NPP and NDC must take it easy as the issue can be resolved. While struggling to find solution to the issue of cars, we must not lose sight of other important government properties spread throughout the country that need to be handed over to the current government.
 Do we have no problem regarding the houses and other government properties?
 Unless we get the hint from government or the transitional team, we might take it that there is nothing amiss.
 The hullabaloo over the cars and other government properties is an eye opener for all of us especially the ruling government and the outgone government. since both the NDC and NPP are the main parties in parliament they must hurry up with the passage of the RTI bill into law. It is their best opportunity to avoid conflict over state assets in future.
 An important aspect of the law is the establishment of info desk in all government offices that have the mandate to keep records of government properties.
 Such records would then be transferred periodically to a central data base that can be made available on line and can be obtained by any Ghanaian for a small fee. You would agree with me that if the RTI law were in place not only the transitional team but central data base could have been tapped for information on the cars and other state properties.
 This will in turn save us from embarrassing conflicts over cars and other state assets
 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR eanfoworld for sustainable development Abdulai.alhasan@gmail.com/eanfoworld@yahoo.com 0244370345/0208844792/0274853710"	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"245"	2017-02-02	"Vice President Dr Mahamudu Bawumia has said he wishes the Right To Information Bill were passed within the first 100 days of the Akufo-Addo government.
Speaking at a Good Corporate Governance Initiative event in Accra on Tuesday, 31 January, Dr Bawumia said in line with the new government’s resolve to fight corruption, \"we are going to have to push parliament to make the necessary amendments and if I had my way, it should be passed within these first 100 days of this government,\" adding: \"It brings transparency in our governance.\"
The bill has been before parliament for about a decade. Successive governments have been accused of not showing commitment towards its passage.
In the dying embers of his administration, Mr John Mahama said he was hopeful the sixth parliament would pass the bill before its expiration. It however, never happened.
The right to information, also known as freedom of information is an internationally recognised fundamental human right to access information held by government bodies. It is also based on the democratic principle that in a democracy, the sovereignty of a nation lies in the hands of the people in whose name and on whose behalf government exercise powers.
In Ghana this is affirmed by Article 1(1) of the 1992 Constitution which categorically states that ‘the sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of Ghana in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of government are to be exercised.’ This principle is affirmed by article 21(1)(f) of the same Constitution which grants ‘all persons . The right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society’.
The right to information is fundamental to the realisation of economic and social rights as well as civil and political rights. The right to information lays the foundation upon which to build good governance, transparency, accountability, participation, and check arbitrariness and corruption in public life.
It will be recalled that the RTI Bill was first laid before Parliament on 5 February 2010. It has gone through a lot of amendments and changes but is still yet to be passed."	17	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0
"246"	2017-01-08	"A former majority leader and minister for Parliamentary Affairs Felix Owusu Agyapong has cautioned the 7th Parliament to prioritise the passage of the Right to Information Bill.
Felix Owusu Agyapong who served under the Kufuor administration stated that pushing for the passage of the Right to Information Bill at the last hour by immediate past President John Mahama was in bad taste since it involved the fundamental rights of people and the State’s secrecy.
“…they should’ve seen the need for that bill and put it on an urgent situation but because it’s a very important law that is going to look at the fundamental rights of people and the state’s secrecy, I’m not sure we should rush it as suggested by the immediate past President…. When it comes to amendment, you need to be very careful, a comma at one wrong place can make the law different...” he said.
The former Majority leader continued by expressing his joy that Parliament halted the passage of the Bill.
“I’m happy that they’ve agreed that they’ll take it as an important Bill and hope that before the end of this year the current parliament would have looked at it and give us a good law”
Mr Owusu Agyapong was optimistic that the Akufo-Addo administration will be able to put the country back on the development track. He noted that the Kufuor government was able to put the country in the middle-income group without the availability of reserve from oil.
The former Parliamentary Affairs Minister was among several high-profile dignitaries who were in attendance at the inauguration of Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo as the fifth President of the fourth Republic."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"247"	2017-01-06	"A former boss of the Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), Emile Short, has described the legislature’s attempts to pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI) a day before its dissolution a “joke”.
Mr Short said he could not fathom why an important bill such as the RTI was left until the last days of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic.
“I really can’t understand why it has taken so long for parliament to pass this bill. The majority had every opportunity to pass this bill, which has been there for over a decade. I find it almost as a joke that they should attempt a day before the dissolution of this parliament to say that they are going to pass it. It was bound to fail because you cannot pass such an important bill within two days,” he told Emefa Apawu on Class FM’s 505 news programme on Thursday, January 5, 2017.
He said legislators had all the time within the year and the previous years that have gone by to pass the bill and “attempts to pass it at the eleventh hour were just a smoke screen, it wasn’t really a genuine attempt to pass the bill”.
He described the development as “very unfortunate as the bill will play an important role in fighting corruption”.
For him accusations by the Majority in parliament that the Minority tried to stampede the process to have it passed during the tenure of the New Patriotic Party (NPP) government was “unfair because the Majority had all the time in the world”."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"248"	2017-01-05	" Ghana’s outgoing president John Mahama has charged the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic to pass the Right to Information Bill before its dissolution on Friday, January 6, 2017.
 Delivering his last State of the Nation address Thursday, he said the public and civil society organisations are disappointed in “our inability to  pass the Right to Information bill.”
 He, however, noted that they are still hopeful that before “this parliament is dissolved at midnight on the sixth of January a consensus can be found to pass this bill into law.”
 The Deputy Director of Public Affairs of Parliament, Kate Addo disclosed Wednesday that before the sixth parliament of the Fourth Republic ends, legislators will consider some bills that are before it, including the Right to information Bill.
 “The Right to Information Bill is still being discussed. It is at the stage where people are bringing out the flaws of the Bill in order to ensure that we have a law that when is passed is air tight,” she said.The journey is worthwhile
 Mahama also used his final address to tout his achievements as president of the republic, describing his tenure as the commander in chief of Ghana’s armed forces as “a worthwhile journey.”
 “…And let me seize the opportunity to thank God for his grace and to the good people of Ghana for the opportunity to serve you,” he added.
 He also thanked his vice president, Kwesi Amissah-Arthur, the speaker, Doe Adjaho, the Chief Justice, Georgina Theodora Wood and the 270 Members of Parliament for “the cooperation and solidarity I’ve enjoyed during my tenure as president.”Letting the people know where we stand
 Mahama said the purpose of his final address was to let “the people of Ghana know where we stand as a country as the baton of leadership pass from one leader to another. Where are we in this race so to speak in  so far as nation building and how is Ghana faring when compared to other nations in Africa and of course in the world.”
 Ghana under his stewardship, he said experienced significant economic and infrastructural growth amidst global financial meltdown."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"249"	2016-12-31	" By Cletus D Kuunifaa
 It is baffling how our ignorant parliamentarians are still allergic to the new world information order and as a consequence of which they refused to pass the RTI bill into law. The reasons adduced for the non-passage of the bill are wholly lacking in validity. Not for once, twice, but for several times, yet another opportunity to democratize information has been wasted.
 Their misgivings and convictions are deeply rooted in greed, and at worst, are politically motivated. For them to pass their emolument bill which was rushed through parliament without a hitch as opposed to the unintelligent parliamentary blocks to the RTI bill is a testament to their unpatriotic behavior and their penchant for greed and selfishness.
 For them not passing the RTI bill that will deliver transparency and check corruption for good governance, their failure to do so will be cast on a political marble in the political history of this country as the most greedy, wasteful parliament of all time. The non-passage of the RTI bill into law before the rise of parliament is a dent on our democracy and these guys must be ashamed of themselves.
 It’s been the usual blame game and buy-time-attitude emanating from these self-serving clueless selfish parliamentarians. Well, for the records, we have an unchecked box for instilling transparency and fighting corruption in the country after the failure to pass the bill into law.
 What is that we lacked in parliament to pass the RTI bill into law? Intellect, intelligence, patriotism, or honesty? The way that we play politics with very crucial issues in this country is so tainted with bias and that is very polarizing. It appears as if people go into politics for the sake of making money and not with the intent of serving their country and communities.
 The idea of democratizing information is to make information accessible by passing the RTI bill. Globalization and the building of knowledge societies demand higher access to information. Besides investing in appropriate infrastructure and facilitating media literacy, Ghana must also ensure better access, availability and quality of information to her population.
 Whilst several countries have taken the necessary steps to democratize information by passing Freedom of Information Acts (FOIA), Ghana is still lagging behind to foster a role for her citizenry to be involved and be engaged in the democratization of information to ensure easy access to information for civil and political participation.
 It is my fervent hope that the incoming parliament will get this done once they are sworn in. I cannot stress enough that access to information and transparency should be considered a vaccine for ensuring good governance and Ghana must gear up for this vaccine to ensure accountability and prevent corruption.
 We already have the right to information enshrined in the constitution and the RTI law will only operationalize our constitutional right to information under article 21(1) f of the 1992 constitution. When passed, it will consolidate the rights of journalists and the public to access information from government officials and public institutions without hindrance. But, the way things stand now, parliament is depriving us of our fundamental human right by not making the law operational.
 Ghanaians deserve better and somebody must tell us what the hell is going on about the bill, now!Cletus D Kuunifaa TMC Group Can be contacted at: dipnibe@yahoo.com, dipnibe@gmail.com or follow him on twitter@ckuunifaa"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"250"	2016-12-28	"By: Prof Lungu
\"...Re: RTI Bill is needed to curb corruption in the country. Ms. Priscilla S. Djentuh tells us \"...The majority leader Alban Bagbin...assured Ghanaians of the passage of the RTI Bill into law when parliament resumes its sitting after the 2016 elections...\".  The problem for Ghana is, \"majority leader Alban Bagbin\", and his NDC party have practically been saying the same thing the last 4 years, the last 8 years.  Alban Bagbin would say the same thing every month the next 4 years too.  But they got defeated at the polls...THEREFORE...given the lessons of history...and Mahama's unethical appointment of the new Chief for CHRAJ, etc., no sane, reasonable mind can expect the in-coming NPP government to agree to a Mahama version of a so-called Right to Information Bill.  It does not make sense! It ain't gonna happen under Mahama of Bole!...\" (Prof Lungu, 26 Dec 16).
Of late, we have been receiving a lot of questions, messages, and correspondence on the subject of the Freedom of Information (FOI) bill, some, in fact, from our  relatives in Ghana and overseas. So, we read with a certain sense of sharply-moderated hope Ms. Priscilla S. Djentuh's article on Ghanaweb titled, \"Feature: RTI Bill is needed to curb corruption in the country\".
As things are, we've never cared for the title/name \"Right to Information\" for a law that tells citizens you have FREE access to information held by government, unless we the government can provide a compelling, authoritatively, impartially, arbitrated  reason why we the government must withhold the information, or even charge you money for that information. 
Free access implies \"FREEDOM\", unlike a \"Right\" a government can take way any time the government wants. 
We've said that going on 10 years, and still hold that to be the case. 
As such, we rather prefer \"Freedom of Information (FOI), for symbolic reasons, then some. After all, as we've noted the nth time, Mugabe has a Right to Information (RTI) bill for Zimbabwe.  
So, are there a lot of Ghanaians who would want a Mugabe \"Right to Information\" (RTI) bill for Ghana?
We doubt there are any who are sane!
Fact is, \"Right to Information\" does not inspire even chickens. But, sadly, that is how stunningly absent-minded the Accra-based \"Right to Information Coalition (CRTI)\", have been over the years.  It is time the Coalition shifted their strategy to \"FREEDOM\".  
\"Freedom\", as in \"Freedom of Information\" (FOI) bill!
It is \"Freedom of Information\" that inspires, after all!
It is \"Freedom of Information\" that turns even chickens into hawks and produces the greatest defenders of free access to information held by the government in the name of the People.
Every studious African prefer \"freedoms\" to \"rights\"!
FACT:  There is no singular supporter of the FOI bill greater than www.GhanaHero.com.  
Hell, not only do they have a dedicated webpage going on 12 years, they even have the first recorded song for the FOI bill, FOIB, on their website, WWW.ghanahero.com/FOIB.html. That FOIB hit song was recorded when Kibaki was shooting and molesting some of his fellow Kenyans.  
(Visit, read, listen, reflect!). 
FOIB: We don't want no Kibaki problem, seen! 
MAHAMA & NDC BETRAYED GHANA:  According to Ms. Priscilla S. Djentuh, \"...The majority leader Alban Bagbin,...assured Ghanaians of the passage of the RTI Bill into law when parliament resumes its sitting after the 2016 elections...\".  
The problem for Ghana is, \"majority leader Alban Bagbin\", and his NDC party have practically been saying the same thing the last 4 years, the last 8 years. Alban Bagbin would say the same thing every month during the next 4 years too. 
But, they got defeated at the polls. 
THEREFORE, at this stage, given the lessons of history, the historic defeat of the NDC, and Mahama's unethical appointment of the new Chief for CHRAJ, etc., no sane, reasonable mind can expect the in-coming NPP government to agree to a Mahama version of a so-called Right to Information Bill. 
Not!
Not so, since the bill itself was originally an NPP draft that the NDC government took and fooled around with for 8 long years while corruption thrived under their noses!
Not!
It does not make sense!    
It ain't gonna happen under Mahama of Bole!
So it goes, Ghana!
SOURCES/NOTES
1.  Priscilla S. Djentuh.  Feature: RTI Bill is needed to curb corruption in the country
(http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/Feature-RTI-Bill-is-needed-to-curb-corruption-in-the-country-497054).
2.  FOIB.  Read mo!  Listen mo!  Reflect more!  Visit WWW. GhanaHero.com/FOIB.html. Join! 
Visit www.GhanaHero.Com/Visions, for more information.
SUBJ:  It Ain't Gonna Happen Under Mahama of Bole!, by Prof Lungu
Support Fair-Trade Oil Share Ghana (FTOS-Gh) Campaign/Petition:
https://www.change.org/p/ghana-fair-trade-oil-share-psa-campaign-ftos-gh-psa/ 
Brought to you courtesy www.GhanaHero.com©26 Dec 16.
(Powered by: www.GhanaHero.Com)."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"251"	2016-12-26	"Corruption is a form of unethical or dishonest use of position of authority for personal gain. 
In the political field, it may linked to the abuse of power, embezzlement and bribery which causes a decision maker to deviate from entrusted policies for personal benefit. 
Corruption on the African continent coupled with poverty have been re-echoed as a character trait by the western media for many decades.  
The projection of a \"Corrupted Africa\" if not \"impoverished Africa\" by the western world is unfair and yet, some African leaders by their actions do confirm the \"corrupted Africa\" tag through deliberate indulgence in corruption and bribery in governance.  
A report by the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) 2015 revealed various ranks by which African countries are projected on corruption and countries listed included Botwana, Cape Verde, Seychelles, Rwanda, Mauritius and Namibia.  
Other African countries on the list include the Tanzania, Gambia, Togo and Nigeria.  
Our beloved, cherished for being the beacon of democracy in West Africa, Ghana, was ranked the 7th most corrupted country in Africa and this is no good news for all Ghanaians.  
So how have some African countries set her integrity aright, clearing the negative perception of a ‘’corrupted Africa’’?   The RTI BILL  
According to the secretariat of the Right to Information Coalition (CRTI), Ghana, twenty African countries have made efforts to successfully pass the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law and this includes Burkina Faso which is the 7th in West Africa to pass the bill, and this has earned praise from the Media Foundation of West Africa (MFWA).  
Liberia, Guinea, Cote d’Ivoire and Sierra Leone including Nigeria and Niger have all passed the RTI Bill into law in previous years as part of commitment towards accountability and transparency in governance.  
The RTI Coalition, Ghana, as part of its efforts to push for the passage of the RTI bill into Law in August 2015 garnered a group of concerned citizens from various work forces in Accra including students who volunteered to solicit public information from various public institutions in the country.  
The activity was in accordance with article 21 (1) (f) which states that “all persons shall have the right to: information, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society’’.  
At the end of three week exercise, some public heads where these concerned citizens (this creates the impression that all of them were denied access to information) wrote to, requesting information on public issues such as the school feeding programme and mode of scholarships grants to tertiary students which is of public interest were denied access to such information. 
The main reason being the said information are confidential to the public institutions.  
However, some of the institutions where the volunteers requested information, gained answers to certain questions but officials were hesitant to release public documents as requested.  
Meanwhile some volunteers who were market women in Makola and Tema stations were able to solicit information from the AMA concerning the payment of their monthly dues. 
These traders discovered with their enquiries that the supposed monthly dues solicited from them by agents of the AMA were supposed to be paid yearly!  
The John Mahama led administration was beset by several scandals including the Woyome judgement debt scandal, the Smartty bus branding saga, the GYEEDA corruption allegation and the mismanagement concerns at SADA amongst others all of which led to the loss of funds for the state.  
The passage of the RTI bill into law will help to discover many of such corrupt practices in governance and possible solutions to curb the canker.  
According to the Media Foundation for West Africa, Ghana is touted as the most stable democracy in West Africa. 
Successive governments, including the current government of the National Democratic Congress (NDC) have trumpeted their commitment to transparent and accountable governance. 
The right to access information have already been granted Ghanaians, what Ghana needs now ‘’is a law that will spell out the modalities for enjoying this right’’, the RTI Coalition said. 
This is in spite of the fact that more than ten years have passed with pleas by the citizenry and advocacy by civil society groups for a RTI law to be passed.  
After the last sitting of parliament before the December polls, the RTI Coalition, Ghana, released a statement expressing disappointment ‘’over yet another failure by parliament to pass the RTI Bill into law despite promises that the Bill will be passed in the second and third sittings of the legislature this year’’.  
The statement said ‘’Following a series of engagements with the leadership of Parliament and the Attorney General (AG), the AG took a bold step by incorporating all the proposed amendments into a new RTI Bill, and on 18th October, the AG withdrew the old Bill and tabled the revised Bill (RTI BILL 2016) for consideration by Parliament. She specifically wrote to Parliament requesting that the Bill be considered under a Certificate of Urgency’’.  
It said the bill was immediately referred to the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for review and report, affirming that the review process by the committee was within a day, October 23, and submitted to parliament on October 25. 
However, the momentum could not be sustained as the minority members of Parliament raised issues including the lack of quorum to pass the bill.
The majority leader Alban Bagbin, afterwards assured Ghanaians of the passage of the RTI Bill into law when parliament resumes its sitting after the 2016 elections.
Meanwhile various concerns were raised on Wednesday Dec. 21, 2016 when parliament resumed passing the Bill.
Minority leader, Mr Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu ‘’urged the speaker to suspend the consideration of the bill because it could have some implications on some sections of the Presidential Transition Act.’’
The RTI is recognised by the UN, the Commonwealth and African Union as a fundamental human right for transparent governance.
In accordance with the international conventions and treaties on human rights and in order to operationalise the constitutional provision, the RTI Bill was drafted by the government in 1999.
The draft was reviewed in 2003, 2005, and 2007 but failed to be presented to parliament for consideration. 
On 5 February 2010, an RTI Bill was presented to the fifth parliament and referred to the joint committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Communications for consideration and report.
The RTI Coalition said the Joint Committee did a nationwide consultation but could not present their report to the house nor review the problem clauses of the Bill.
After the elections in 2012, the Bill was reintroduced to Parliament in Nov 12, 2013 and was referred to the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.
The Select Committee received memorandum from the forum for Former Member of Parliament, the RTI Coalition Ghana, and the office of the National Chief Imam and the Muslim Community in Ghana.
Among others, the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI, Africa office), the Perfector of Sentiments Foundation (POS) and Persons with Disability Ghana also presented memorandums to the committee on the RTI bill.
Consideration of the bill by the current parliament began in March this year but it was withdrawn and a new bill was introduced due to the numerous amendments proposed by the Select Committee of Parliament. 
The existence of the RTI Bill in Ghana would made it possible for every citizen to access information on policies that governs them, ranging from uses of taxes to exorbitant contracts given out.
When citizens begin to access such information, the decision maker who got the people’s mandate to serve would be very much reminded there and again about accountability to the people.
The elected governors of the citizenry will be mindful to discharge their duties without bias.  
At the end of the day, accountability and transparency may be of paramount interest to those who govern thereby enable citizens to effectively peruse governance activities."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"252"	2016-12-24	" Parliament will resume for a final session on January, 4 , 2017 ahead of its final dissolution on the night of 6th January.
 President John Dramani Mahama is expected to address the House with his final State of the Nation’s Address the next day after parliament reconvenes.
 The House adjourned late last night, Friday after four days of sitting, since reconvening after the December 7th Elections.
 Among the businesses undertaken within the session was the approval of the report of the Presidential committee on emoluments for Article 71 Office holders which was done last night.
 The reports spells out the end of service benefit for the President, Vice-President and Ministers and other senior government officials.
 However, the minority managed to block proposed agreement for the one hundred and thirty eight point five million dollar deal between government and AMERI Group for the operation of the T3 plant at Takoradi.
 The Right to Information bill was also not passed after being on the desk for many years awaiting the final passage.
 The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognized as a right under International Conventions on Human rights.
 The current parliament, though has made progress with the bill, there are currently 24 proposed amendments left to be made to the bill.
 The Majority caucus accused the minority side of dragging its feet in the consideration of the remaining amendments left to be worked on before passage of the substantive bill.
 But the Minority in Parliament rejected such claims by the majority caucus.
 Deputy Minority Leader, Dominic Nitiwul, who rubbished such allegation insisted they’re most committed to passing the RTI Bill.
 Mr Nitiwul had rather intimated in an interview with Accra-based Citi FM that: “We are all committed to passing it. Every single member of Parliament is committed to passing the Right to Information bill. As a party and as a caucus, we are one of the few people who want it passed. We thought that even by this time, we should have passed that Bill.”
 He continued: “There are clauses in there that we think are problematic. One of them is the implementation because the majority, thinking they would win the election, decided to push the implementation to five years from today. It was one of the issues we said no to. So there are some pertinent issues we need to agree on before we will pass it as it is.”
 The First Deputy Speaker, Ebo Barton Odro announced the House will reconvene, next month ahead of the dissolution."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"253"	2016-12-22	"The Minority in Parliament has rejected claims by the majority caucus that it is not showing political will towards the  passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill.
The Majority caucus yesterday [Wednesday] accused the minority side of dragging its feet in the consideration of the remaining amendments left to be worked on before passage of the substantive bill.
The Majority say there is a deliberate attempt  by many MPs on the minority side  to deny the house of the needed quorum to transact business matter relating to the bill when it convened Tuesday.
But Deputy Minority Leader, Dominic Nitiwul,has rubbished such allegation insisting they’re most committed to passing the RTI Bill.
Speaking in an interview with Accra-based Citi FM, Mr Nitiwul said: “We are all committed to passing it. Every single member of Parliament is committed to passing the Right to Information bill. As a party and as a caucus, we are one of the few people who want it passed. We thought that even by this time, we should have passed that Bill.”
He continued: “There are clauses in there that we think are problematic. One of them is the implementation because the majority, thinking they would win the election, decided to push the implementation to five years from today. It was one of the issues we said no to. So there are some pertinent issues we need to agree on before we will pass it as it is.”"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"254"	2016-12-22	"Majority Leader, Alban Sumana Kingsford Sumana Bagbin, says the failure of Members of the Sixth Parliament of the Fourth Republic to pass the Right To Information (RTI) Bill into an Act will amount to causing financial loss to the State.
He believes a lot of resources have been spent by the State to facilitate the passage of the RTI Bill into law over the last three years.
However, failure by Members to ensure the smooth passage of the Bill, he noted, means all the resources the government injected into the facilitation process have gone waste.
“I have always maintained that this Parliament must pass this RTI Bill before we rise, it is very important. Even if it means we have to sit till night we have to pass this Bill. Everything has been done. It is just a matter of going through the motions now.”
“I chaired the Committee as far back as 2013 and submitted the report. In 2014, I proposed the amendments and because the amendments were so huge in terms of not only numbers but content, we were compelled halfway through to refer them to the Attorney-General to incorporate it into a new Bill. The Attorney-General department has done that – they have relaid the new Bill which was referred to the Committee chaired by a new Chairman now …they have reported to the House. We’ve started the Consideration and we are now at Clause 40 and over.”
“I mean why should we allow this to go waste? That will be causing financial loss to the State,” he noted.
Hon. Bagbin made this observation on the sidelines of a heated argument between the Minority Leader, Hon. Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu and the Speaker of Parliament, Rt. Hon. Edward Doe Adjaho, over the RTI Bill on the floor of Parliament, Wednesday, December 21, 2016.
Since Tuesday, December 20, 2016, Hon. Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu has been at the forefront of trying to halt any deliberations on the RTI Bill, believing that the time frame for the out-going government in pursuing the passage of the Bill into law is too short.
He is also of the view that because the country is in transition now, the out-going government should not be seen to be doing some type of business, including consideration of the RTI Bill.
But Hon. Bagbin said because there is no law specifying or defining what an out-going government should do and not do, it was important for the House to be guided by experience.
Besides, the out-going government has up to the night of January 6, 2017, to continue managing the affairs of the country."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"255"	2016-12-20	"The Speaker of Parliament, Rt. Hon Edward Doe Adjaho has asked the out-going MPs to vacate their offices in the job 600 before January 6, 2017 to facilitate the transitional arrangement to usher in the MP-elect for the Seventh Parliament of the Fourth Republic.
He said he as the Speaker has already packed all things from the office he is occupying waiting for January 6, 2017 to handover peacefully to the Clerk of Parliament.
This, he believes will ensure the smooth takeover by the new Speaker of the Seventh Parliament.
He made this observation in his welcome address to Members in the Chamber of the House, Tuesday, December 20, 2016.
The Speaker also urged the House to ensure the speedy passage of the RTI Bill looking at the enormous work the lawmakers did before going on recess."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"256"	2016-11-19	" The 2016 Election Presidential Encounter (EPE), organised by the state broadcaster, Ghana Broadcasting Corporation (GBC), in partnership with the National Commission on Civic Education (NCCE) and Star-Ghana, hosted President John Mahama last Wednesday.
 President Mahama who is the presidential candidate of the National Democratic Congress (NDC) in the December 7 polls was at GBC to tell Ghanaians his vision and policies for the country in the next four years if he gets the opportunity to remain in the Flagstaff House, come January 7, 2017.
 The studio for the live telecast had a fair representation of audience from the various key stakeholder organisations and groups in the country. A team of NDC members, including party supporters and ministers, were also seated behind the president in solidarity.
 The host, Selikem, gave a detailed background introduction of the president before welcoming him to the seat for his 20-minute slot, within which he told Ghanaians what he will offer should he be retained in power.
 Dressed in a blue suit and white shirt with a yellow pocket square, he opened his statement by showing gratitude to Ghanaians for the opportunity to serve as their president, while admitting that his tenure has been one of challenges.
 The situation, he said, led to the making of difficult decisions in order to stabilise the economy, resolve the power crisis and rebuild the social infrastructure of the country.
 President Mahama, however, showed optimism for the future of the country, stating that the foundation for a better Ghana has been laid in the past four years.
 “We have made sacrifices together as a country and now the heavy lifting have been done and the foundation has been built so there is not much heavy lifting to be done just blocks and that is much easier… the country is on the cast of brighter days,” he said.
 The president now turned his attention to the youth unemployment, a topic he described as the most critical challenge every leader faces but was quick to say that his government has the most credible youth development and employment programmes that seek to engage the youth, especially in the private sector.
 He debunked the notion that government has the sole power of employing graduates after their university education. According to the president, government’s ability to employ is very restricted, rather he said the private formal and informal sectors were the institutions that employed more people.
 The president concluded his presentation a few minutes before his allocated time with words of encouragement to his compatriots to be optimistic about the future.
 The question segment had the president fielding questions on very pertinent issues ranging from health, education, employment, corruption, security, among others, from the studio audience and public who were viewing the proceedings from Cape Coast.Sustainable Employment
 The issue of unemployment, especially for university graduates, has been the snag of the NDC government as more and more graduates finish school only to find no jobs.
 President Mahama, in answering the first question on how he intends to provide sustainable employment for Ghanaian youth, outlined plans that government has initiated to reduce unemployment.
 According to him, there is a need for industry and academia to fashion out a more sustainable solution to unemployment, noting that the most important step is to increase skills training to make more Ghanaian youth employable.
 Justifying why he should be given a second term in office, he said, “Practical and vocational training is core to solving Ghana’s unemployment challenge, and this has been the guiding principle of his policies.”
 President Mahama stated that government has made investments in the production sector to create sustainable jobs.
 “Ongoing economic progress will also open the way for more jobs. Takoradi and Tema harbour expansion projects have provided jobs to more than 2,000 people,” he said.
 He said more employment skills had been acquired through the introduction of more modules of the National Youth Employment programme and would continue to chart that path to drastically reduce the incidence of unemployment.Anti-Corruption
 President Mahama has been accused of condoning corruption in his government despite boasting of efforts in fighting the canker.
 The NDC flagbearer insisted on the Wednesday show that his government was prosecuting persons accused of corruption despite the consistent New Patriotic Party’s (NPP’s) revelation of corrupt practices by officials of his administration such as the misappropriation of funds that charactersied social intervention programmes such as GYEEDA and SADA.
 He claimed that government has been able to retrieve about GH¢40 million from officials who siphoned taxpayers’ money in the National Service Scheme (NSS) scandal.
 “These GYEEDA prosecutions started in 2012; and we are in 2016; but I can’t go and catch them and lock them up on the presumption that they are guilty.
 “The NSS case how many years is it? Three years now. People inserted ghost names in the national service payroll and got millions of Ghana cedis, we’ve retrieved GH¢40 million from them. Some of them have pleaded guilty and offered a refund so we’ve gotten back GH¢40 millions of taxpayers’ money.
 “But those that are under criminal investigations it’s been going on for three years now. But we just must have patience with the process because we cannot go back to unconstitutional system,” he added.
 The president said his government’s case with Woyome is a testimony of a government willing to boldly deal with corruption.
 He said unlike some of her predecessors who sat down for claimants of judgment debts to obtain default judgments, the AG, Marrieta Appiah-Opong, has been vociferous in dealing with all false claims and contracts.
 The president’s statement was on the same day the AG was accused of failing to pursue the GH¢51m judgment debt paid to NDC bankroller and businessman, Alfred Agbesi Woyome, when the AG backtracked on her application to orally cross examine Mr Woyome.
 But the president described the claim as falsehoods brewed for the “purposes of political propaganda” as he maintained that the AG had “pursued this case relentlessly.”
 He explained that the AG put in an application for oral examination, but at the same time, “discussions had been ongoing in respect of a settlement and before that happened, a term of settlement was granted.”
 “So she [the AG] went to the Supreme Court and discontinued the oral examination so that she could look at the terms of settlement and see if it was acceptable, or meet with his lawyers and agree on what the terms were with the option to come back in the event she was not satisfied with the terms,” he stated.
 “People want me to arrest everybody who’s been accused of a crime and lock them up because they did it in PNDC time.
 Yes, I would have locked them up; but we didn’t have a constitution then and if we didn’t have a constitution and I was a dictator, if you are accused of corruption I will catch you and lock you up and wait until you are proven guilty or innocent then release you. But we cannot eat our cake and have it. People have to go through the process and the process is very slow. Everybody knows,” he added.Nurses Allowance
 The president, responding to a question by a member of the audience on the contradiction regarding the payment of nurses’ allowance, denounced the suggestions that his administration has gone back on its decision not to pay trainee nurses’ allowance in order to win their support ahead of the December elections.
 The president explained that government has decided to pay the allowance in anticipation of a law that would migrate the trainee nurses onto the Students’ Loan Trust Fund.
 “We decided that we were going to move them onto the Students Loan so we stopped the trainee allowances in order to use the funds, instead, to ensure that it created more opportunities for nurses to be employed. Then our attention was drawn to the fact that [the trainee nurses] don’t qualify because the Students’ Loan Act does not allow them to be on Students’ Loan,” he said.
 Meanwhile, Vice President Kwesi Amissah-Arthur recently justified the decision by government not to pay the nurses’ allowance on grounds that the allowance was depleting funds meant for improving nursing education.
 The vice president’s pronouncement which was a clear contradiction of the earlier promise by the president that the allowance was going to be restored has raised suspicion that the plan to restore the allowance is to gain votes.
 Nonetheless, the president on Wednesday stressed that while the government worked towards amending the law to allow the student nurses to be migrated onto the Students’ Loan Trust Fund, there was a need to keep paying the previous allowance to enable the students to finance their upkeep.
 “They are being paid an updated allowance not at a level they used to receive in the past, but a lower allowance so that they are able to make ends meet until we are able to amend the students’ loan trust law,” he said.RTI Bill
 After stating on an international platform that he’s unaware about the whereabouts of the Right to Information (RIT) Bill, President Mahama on Wednesday said he could not force parliament to pass the 10-year old bill although he is not scared of its passage.
 Answering a question from the President of the Ghana Journalists’ Association (GJA), Affail Monney, on the passage of the Right to Information Bill, President Mahama said, “I can’t force them [Parliament] to pass it.”
 “We have separation of powers, parliament is autonomous, I can’t force them to pass it; but I have been advocating for it that they should pass the Bill. It’s been too long, in the state of the nation addresses, I’ve referred to that Bill, and I’ve indicated that I don’t know why it has taken too long in parliament,” he said.
 The bill that has been in and out of parliament for over a decade now is yet to be passed, despite its enormous benefits in enhancing access to information in the country.
 However, the president explained that the bill after its presentation to parliament, was placed before a committee, adding, “They said they will go round the country, they’ve gone round the country, they said they need more stakeholder consultations, I don’t know where it is now.”
 The president’s concluding remarks was about seeking votes: voting for his government he said means sustaining the development momentum in the country adding that a new government would mean starting all over again.
 Reiterating his earlier statement of the challenges he has faced as president, President Mahama said God has been his source of strength, adding that his wish is for the will of God to be done in the December elections.
 “If it is His will that I continue as president, it surely will happen.”
 The flagbearer of the Progressive People’s Party (PPP) will take his turn at the next Presidential Encounter with GBC."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"257"	2016-11-16	"Several months ago nobody contemplated Donald Trump’s election victory. Coming out of a bruised Republican (GOP) primary following which some GOP big wigs distanced themselves from candidate Trump, least was expected of this victory as many were skeptical of his prospects of winning. Republicans assumed he would be a drag on the party’s hopes of winning in this election campaign. Now, he wasn’t at all.
His campaign began and endured amidst vitriol, animosity and some dangerous rhetoric and he would have the unpleasant situation of changing two of his campaign managers and ultimately winning with the third one. On election night, Americans spoke and voters swept Republicans into power, handing the GOP the White House, the Senate and the House in a wave that no one saw coming. 
Trump’s victory does not mean the sun will not continue to rise in the morning. Indeed, it did rise and will continue to set in the evening every day. The World freaked out at Trump’s victory because one could not stand the heck of Trump’s presidency against the campaign vitriol. But, on a soberer note, let’s intone from what Governor Cuomo once said that “you campaign in poetry and govern in prose” (1985) and trust the President-elect, Mr. Donald Trump will just do well.
There surely are reasons why Donald Trump won the elections irrespective of all the polls in favor of Hillary Clinton. Like it or not, Hillary’s email scandal, the Benghazi issue, the silent majority which embodied voters from the rust belt, FBI Director’s announcement of a new inquiry into her use of email while secretary of state shortly before election day, all of these contributed to stop Hillary’s campaign’s momentum. Indeed, as Hillary indicated as quoted: “but our analysis is that Comey's letter raising doubts that were groundless, baseless, proven to be, stopped our momentum. We dropped, and we had to keep really pushing ahead to regain our advantage” (2016). 
In all of this mix, it is imperative for Democrats (DNC) to get back to the drawing board, put their act together, and plan towards 2020 elections.
Now, what are the parallels to draw from this US election? In otherwise, what lessons are there for Ghana on the cusp of a presidential election?  If Ghanaian political parties’ officials think because Donald Trump won it might translate into a winning spree for opposition parties in Ghana, we probably have to consider these parallels:
First of all, it can be argued that Hillary’s email scandal and the Benghazi issue could be viewed as Ghana’s massive corruption and the numerous deals. These two issues were a drag on the campaign and did not bode well for Hillary’s campaign. The email scandal took center stage in the US elections as it bordered on trustworthiness and to a large extent on honesty and transparency. Ostensibly, some voters voted based on trust, honesty and transparency.  
The parallel in the Ghanaian elections could be encapsulated in the massive corruption and the numerous deals to boot à savoir the Armajaro and Embraer deals, the SADA and Gyeeda deals, Waterville, STX Housing, Smarttys, Insofoton and other corruption scandals under both Kufour and Mahama’s administration. This paper has neither statistics nor evidence to present, but suffice to state that common knowledge indicates corruption to be presided over in both regimes. 
What happened and Parliament rose without passing the RTI bill? This lack will linger on as a justification for corruption in Ghana and I bet voters are probably bracing up for a jolt in the upcoming elections. And, on the blind side, we have government officials who do not declare their assets and within the space of limited time, they are erecting or have erected mansions, we have public officials who are paying for tuition abroad for relatives, we have government officials who have bought houses in the US and in some other countries. Then, we have the relevant question to ask about where the funds are coming from?
The second parallel to draw is based on the campaign message that is focused on the creation of jobs. Trump campaigned on a message of creating jobs, bringing back jobs and making America great again. On a parallel note, the unemployment situation in Ghana is really thought provoking and very troubling. Therefore, any campaign message to stem the graduate unemployment, reduce utility tariffs, reinvigorate the private sector, stabilize the currency and arrest the fall in GDP is likely to woo voters. This is true, because, we know that jobs are the livewire of every economy. But, if the economy is reeling and a selected few are double-dipping, dealing, diming, dicing and nickeling the economy, don’t you believe that voters have eyes to perceive what the hell is going on? 
Expressly put, any candidate campaigning to rid the nation of economic saboteurs, thieves and to instill discipline; a candidate campaigning to restore rule of law and transparency, given the mix of corruption bedeviling our economy, that candidate, to my mind, might spring a surprise in our elections.
Thirdly, the silent majority carried Trump to victory. Given that silent votes are prevalent in any election cycle; it remains to be seen how this parallel will play out in the impending Ghanaian elections.
Next, media is the fourth realm in any democratic dispensation. The United States has a very vibrant media landscape and the way a candidate uses it will always play to the advantage. Trump, a shrewd business mogul, a TV personality, spent less on TV ads and yet remained a constant presence on TV during the campaign cycle. Ghana in the same dimension has a vibrant media landscape and it will be interesting to see how the parallel will hem out.
Lastly, social media was heavily used by both Trump and Hillary. It is hoped that the candidates in Ghana will take advantage of the social media peak and use it appropriately to their advantage.
Political parties’ strategists in Ghana have to work hard to turn out the silent majority and I wish all of them Good luck!
Cletus D Kuunifaa
TMC Group 
Can be contacted at dipnibe@gmail.com, dipnibe@yahoo.com or follow him on twitter @ckuunifaa"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"258"	2016-11-13	"The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) has expressed displeasure over failure by Parliament to pass Ghana’s decades old Information Bill before going on recess.
The Coalition said the inaction of the House was ‘surprising and disappointing’ after various steps had been taken in the previous month by the Attorney General (AG) and the Parliamentary Select Committee to ensure that the Bill was passed in the last sitting.
In a statement copied to the Ghana News Agency, the Coalition said the move was a fall back on the commitment made by the Parliament to pass the RTI Bill into law in the second and third sittings of the House.
The Bill was revised and renamed the RTI Bill 2016 after it was incorporated with all proposed amendments by the AG and forwarded to Parliament for consideration following series of engagements with the AG and the leadership of the legislative body.
According to the Coalition, the AG subsequently requested Parliament that the Bill be considered under a Certificate of Urgency.
After being introduced to Parliament, the Coalition said, the new RTI Bill was rapidly referred to the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for their review and report, which was completed within a day and submitted to Parliament two days later.
“In Parliament, the consideration of the new Bill progressed speedily as the Bill saw 48 clauses considered in one day (Monday 31st October)”, it said, however, the momentum could not be sustained as the minority members of Parliament began to raise concerns over minor issues.
“Some of the issues raised included the lack of quorum, but the Coalition’s monitoring of the consideration process indicated that some other Bills including loan agreements were passed despite the lack of quorum”.
The Coalition noted that if the NDC government really wanted to pass the Bill, it could have used its majority in parliament to do so.
It also observed that a number of bills had been passed even when the numbers of lawmakers were short of quorum.
How come Parliament had the numbers to pass the Local Government Act and the Aids Commission’s Act but lacked the numbers to enable the passage of the RTI Bill, it quizzed.
“One would have thought that given the fact that the Bill has been revised and all amendments incorporated and presented as one document, Parliament would no longer have an excuse for delaying the passage of the Bill.
“It would appear, however, and sadly so, that the forces that are against the passage of the law are much more than the Coalition had thought.” 
The Coalition said: “We would like to reiterate that the failure to pass the RTI law by the current Parliament is a missed opportunity for all Ghanaians, for the NDC government and the country at large. It is an indelible indictment on Parliament. 
“We believe that this government still has an opportunity to redeem itself and the country’s ratings on international platforms - which government has noted is retrogressing due to the non-passage of the RTI law - by passing the RTI Bill before Parliament lapses in January 2017.
“We have noted with concern and indeed it is very worrying that anytime there is a need to put in place laws that will enhance citizens’ right to hold their leaders accountable, governments both past and present are often very reluctant to pass or even initiate such legislation.
“Civil society organisations would have to campaign, petition, protest, and sometimes coerce government for such laws to be enacted.
“The Coalition would like Ghanaians to judge from this over 13 years’ advocacy and failed promises by both the NPP (New Patriotic Party) and the NDC administration whether our politicians can be trusted.
“A Bill that managed to weather the storm under the NDC government and finally got to the final stages of Parliamentary processes twice, couldn’t be passed due to the lack of political will by Parliament to prioritize the consideration of the Bill.
“As a Coalition, we are completely disappointed over the non-passage of the Bill which we had every reason to expect would have been passed before the elections in December\"."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"259"	2016-10-25	"It is urgent for parliament to pass the Right to Information Bill (RTI), Deputy Attorney General Dr Dominic Ayine has said,
“The Attorney General has impressed upon parliament that it is urgent that we pass the bill. You will remember that the president assured the nation that before the end of his first term in office, he was going to ensure that we passed the bill and that is how come the AG has taken the bill very seriously. Yes parliament knows and has accepted that fact there is an urgency to the bill but technically, we have not requested for a certificate of urgency,” the MP for Bolga East told Class News’ parliamentary correspondent Ekow Annan in an interview on Wednesday, 26, October after the repackaged RTI bill was re-laid before parliament for deliberations aimed at its passage before the house rises.
The objective of the bill is to enhance transparency in governance by empowering citizens to hold public institutions accountable for their actions and inactions.
Concerns have been raised by some civil society groups over what they describe as undue delay by the legislators to pass the bill despite several assurances by both the Speaker and leadership of the House.
On Wednesday, the repackaged bill was taken through a second reading and the legislators shared their thoughts and opinions on its contents.
Dr Ayine said the bill incorporates all the concerns of stakeholders which will make its passage very smooth.
“The strategy that the Attorney General adopted was to withdraw the bill and incorporate the various amendments that had been agreed upon by the house by consensus and re-laid,” he explained.
He said 32 amendments had been undertaken and legislators are at liberty to make other recommendations. However, he hopes that very few changes will be made so that it could be passed into law as soon as possible.
Dr Ayine said the bill has been crafted to conform with certain international treaties and conventions regarding citizens’ right to information “such as the African Union Module Law on the right to information, so, we will be passing a law that will be accepted internationally”.
Various civil society organisations such as the Coalition of the Right to Information made contributions to the current bill before parliament."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"260"	2016-10-18	" The government, through the Attorney General, Marietta Brew Appiah-Opong, has again withdrawn the earlier Right To Information (RTI) and replaced it with a new one.
 The first bill was laid in parliament on November 12, 2013 and the legislators have been working on it for the past three years.
 The Attorney-General withdrew the bill which had undergone a lot of scrutiny and amendments and the new one takes care of strong resentments and concerns by some Members of Parliament (MPs) who think that the present bill will do more harm than good to the governance of this nation.
 Some members of parliament think that the current bill allows for too much intrusion into governance while it seems to give unfettered access to public information by ordinary citizens, which they think could be injurious to the smooth governance of the nation.
 After the withdrawal of the previous RTI which was at an advanced stage of consideration, the minority leader, Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, said the government had not been fair to the MPs who had laboriously gone through the bill and gotten to the advanced stage.
 He said the majority leader, Alban Bagbin, for instance, had put in a lot of efforts to ensure that the bill was passed on time.
 Responding to the concern of the minority leader, Mr Bagbin said it was important for the bill to be withdrawn and replaced with a new one so that all the various concerns raised by MPs could be captured in it.
 He said that would also ensure that members cooperate and expedite action on the passage of the bill before this parliament is dissolved.
 He noted that there is concern everywhere that the passage of the bill has delayed and that leadership had to take that decision for a new bill that would appeal to all MPs for its early passage. He indicated that when the bill was passed it would enhance the integrity of the government and the international relations of the country."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"261"	2016-10-15	"The Vice Chairman of the Constitutional and Legal Committees of Parliament, George Loh, has accused the opposition in Parliament (Minority) of deliberately delaying the passage of the Right To Information Bill, 2015, for the party’s political gains.
According to him, the NPP which has promised in its 2016 manifesto to pass the RTI when it assumes power, has it’s Members of Parliament intentionally introducing several amendments to the Bill whenever its being considered on the floor of the House to slow its passage.
The right to information, also known as freedom of information is an internationally recognized fundamental human right to access information held by government bodies. It is also based on the democratic principle that in a democracy, the sovereignty of a nation lies in the hands of the people in whose name and on whose behalf government exercise powers.
On November 12, 2013, the RTI Bill, 2015 was tabled before the 6th Parliament and was subsequently referred to the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for consideration and report to the plenary.
The Committee presented its report to the House in December 2014 recommending 157 clauses of amendments to the Bill.
In March 2016, Parliament began the consideration of the Bill with the proposed amendments by the Select Committee. Between March and June, 2016, Parliament had considered 29 out of the 157 clauses of amendments.
However, Parliament suspended the consideration of the RTI Bill to make room for some other Bills they described were very much of interest to the nation.
The Right To Information Coalition which is championing the passage of the Bill has since then voiced its displeasure about the way Parliament is handling the Bill.
On Tuesday, October 11, 2016, some members of the Coalition stormed the various streets leading to the Parliament of Ghana and demanded from the Speaker and the legislators to pass the RTI Bill, 2015 before the dissolution of the 6th Parliament.
But speaking on Joy FM’s News File programme show, Hon. George Loh who’s also the MP for North Dayi, stated that any blame for the delayed passing of the Bill should be put at the door steps of the NPP.
“I hear the NPP go into a Manifesto launch and say they are going to bring RTI when they are voted into power. For eight years when they were in power, it was in Parliament, we have come and we have made a commitment that by the end of this term we’ll pass it. 
What is even shocking is that if you go to the Hansard…the difficulties we have on the floor of Parliament is occasioned by the opposition, they are challenging everything. 
In fact most of the amendment stands in their name, so they are actually truncating us from passing the RTI. They come back and put it in their manifesto that they will pass it. What they are doing is deliberate.”"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"262"	2016-10-11	" Majority Leader, Hon. Alban Sumana Kingsford Bagbin, has assured that the Legislature is more determined to pass the Right To Information (RTI) Bill, 2015 into law before the dissolution of the 6th Parliament by end of October, 2016.
 Bagbin who is also the Leader of Government Business gave the assurance when presenting the Business Statement of the first week of the 4th Meeting of the 4th Session of the 6th Parliament of the 4th Republic on the floor of the House on Tuesday.
 On November 12, 2013, the RTI Bill, 2015 was tabled before the 6th Parliament and was subsequently referred to the Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for consideration and report to the plenary.
 The Committee presented its report to the House in December 2014 recommending 157 clauses of amendments to the Bill.
 In March 2016, Parliament began the consideration of the Bill with the proposed amendments by the Select Committee. Between March and June, 2016, Parliament had considered 29 out of the 157 clauses of amendments.
 However, Parliament suspended the consideration of the RTI Bill to make room for some other Bills they described were very much of interest to the nation.
 The Right To Information Coalition which is championing the passage of the Bill has since then voiced its displeasure about the way Parliament is handling the Bill.
 On Tuesday, October 11, 2016, some members of the Coalition stormed the various streets leading to the Parliament of Ghana and demanded from the Speaker and the legislators to pass the RTI Bill, 2015 before the dissolution of the 6th Parliament.
 But the Majority Leader who is also the MP for Nadowli/Kaleo constituency briefing Members on the Business Statement of the House said “Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize on the RTI Bill. It is very crucial. The Committee is proposing that we finish this Bill before we rise by the end of this month.”"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"263"	2016-10-10	"The Coalition of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill on Tuesday, 11 October picketed parliament as the house resumed from recess.
This is in a bid to bring pressure to bear on the lawmakers to expedite action on the passage of the bill. The placard-wielding group described the delay in the passage of the bill as unacceptable.
The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognised as a right under the International Convention on Human Rights.
The RTI bill, which arguably is the oldest before parliament, was among the many bills the house was expected to pass before recess. It, however, remains before the house.
Meanwhile, Speaker of Parliament Edward Doe Adjaho in his welcome address called for the cooperation of the MPs so as to complete the business of the house in time.
“…Honourable members, this is an election year and even though time available to the house is limited … I do hope that the honourable members will give the chair and leadership maximum cooperation and improve attendance in the house so as to let us complete our business on time. I also urge the leadership of the majority to press upon the ministries, departments, and agencies of government to respect the timetable of the house and prioritise the respective business and other proposals they intend to introduce for the consideration and approval of parliament,” Mr Adjaho said."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"264"	2016-09-30	"The title of this piece, and the subject for today inferentially, came to me when I was listening to morning radio discussions on vexing public issues last Wednesday.
I was struck by the deliberate ignorance of a majority of our public advocates and intellectuals on the basic meaning and implications of democratic government. It seems to me that condemning outcomes one disagrees with has now been effectively conflated with opposition to the utility of democratic rule.
It appears when one is having problems with the outcome of a particular decision making process, one goes on and on to condemn the whole structure and architecture of our democracy. This, of course, invests a perfect working system with a depressing lack of legitimacy, and reduces mass support for our type of government. 
This is an extremely grievous mistake, and may well in an insidious way, invite nation wreckers or worse, provoke the destruction of our democracy because it has been thoroughly damned as inadequate by respectable public advocates who are pushing for changes to their advantage. It is even worse when in a moment of reflection, one discovers no inherent advantage in the new position being advocated.
Permit me to give examples. The so-called work of Parliament being seen as a rubber-stamp in certain cases and invitation to the President to interfere in the running of the business of the house by our advocates and intellectuals as if something strange and against the rules of parliamentary business is being done. 
The long-running argument over the passage into law of the Right to Information Bill or RTI for short, and lastly, the interesting fight over who becomes the next presiding member of the Kumasi Metropolitan Assembly.  
It would appear when our public advocates in our non-governmental organisations and others in our civic and civil society groups fail to get their way, they blame the system, rather than their unwillingness to accept and learn the simple truth that democratic government is government by persuasion, and lobbying, and that acceptance or rejection of any position is no indication of refusal of the system to address matters of public importance. Democracy 
Lobbying and persuasion do take time to achieve and realise its objectives, regardless of the inherent necessity or urgency of what is being lobbied for and who benefits. Even then, lobbying and persuasion must end in voting one way or another on the issue on the table. That is the kernel of democracy.  Its opposite is tyranny, dictatorship and the cutting of heads by leaders who have imposed themselves on us. 
Is that what our latter day civil society advocates want or desire?
I noticed this as far back on January 7, 2005, when Parliament was debating and eventually electing a new Speaker to replace the Right Honourable Peter Ala Adjetey who had been disowned and sacked for being impartial by his own New Patriotic Party (NPP) in Parliament which had the majority and, thus, the right to select a Speaker. 
Many of those of our public intellectuals and advocates who were curiously enough, angry and frustrated because according to them, the House was wasting time in electing a new Speaker, and delaying thereby, the swearing into office of President Kufuor to begin his second term in office.
The issue eventually ended in the election of the Right Honourable Sekyi-Hughes as the new Speaker of Parliament. One would have thought that the delay which had been widely condemned for being time-wasting and frivolous would have been cured by Parliament with the requisite constitutional amendment to separate the election and swearing-in of a new Speaker from that of the President occurring consecutively on the same day.
Nothing of the sort happened. Meaning, the entire cacophony was inspired not by genuine problems with the architecture of events on that day, but with the valiant effort of the Minority then led by Honourable Bagbin to have Honourable Adjetey re-elected. Then I realised that it was opposition to outcomes that our public intellectuals are against, and not procedure which are transparently obvious and democratic to all. RTI bill 
The same thing is happening right before our eyes with the escalating debate and arguments over the RTI bill. The process in Parliament, completely legal and in consonance with the standing orders, is being portrayed as being against the wishes of Ghanaians. Who told the supporters of this bill that they are campaigning for us? When I was in the US, I discovered that similar legislation was utilised by only a tiny fraction of both the journalistic profession and researchers in the academic community, in spite of its vaunted usefulness to democracy. Without RTI, this democracy would still be very genuine, and address our needs and requirements as a people.
Demonising Parliament for the sake of a pet elitist idea not central to how we govern ourselves is unfortunate. Why should the House stop other business which appears more pressing to it to deal with a matter on which consensus on both necessity and urgency have not being crafted and agreed beforehand? Bringing in the President makes these advocates look painfully ignorant of how our democracy and constitutional architecture work.
This alleged delay, of course, feeds into the utterly indefensible and self-created perception that our Parliament is a rubber-stamp of the executive. The job of each arm of government is not to frustrate the others, but  rather to facilitate governance.  Else, there will be no government possible. This is so obvious and plain that I wonder each time I hear it from our public advocates and intellectuals whether they really want the system to work, and get their ideas passed into law eventually, or they don’t.
No matter how clever and patriotic ones ideas or proposals are, they still have to be accepted by the majority before they can become law, and, thus, persuasion is the currency of our democratic system of government. No Parliament in the world can get any work done if it is full of rebels, each with a cause that conflicts with others. It is no credit to the intelligence and cleverness of our public advocates when they seem to be promoting rebellion instead of consensus about how elected assemblies go about their business.
The same unfounded frustration is clear in the Kumasi City Council impasse. If it is true that the work of the assembly is being impeded by lack of agreement on a new presiding member and also a new MCE, that would be a more powerful impetus to consensus and effective provision of local government than the insults and abuse being hurled at people with differences on a matter dear to them.
Our democracy was crafted and purposely designed to take cognisance of differences in opinion over public issues. It is ignoring those issues or riding roughshod over them that constitutes behaviour dangerous to the health of our system of governance."	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"265"	2016-09-30	"The title of this piece, and the subject for today inferentially, came to me when I was listening to morning radio discussions on vexing public issues last Wednesday.  I was struck by the deliberate ignorance of a majority of our public advocates and intellectuals on the basic meaning and implications of democratic government .  It seems to me that condemning outcomes one disagrees with has now been effectively conflated with opposition to the utility of democratic rule.
It appears when one is having problems with the outcome of a particular decision making process, one goes on and on to condemn the whole structure and architecture of our democracy. This, of course, invests a perfect working system with a depressing lack of legitimacy, and reduces mass support for our type of government. 
This is an extremely grievous mistake, and may well in an insidious way, invite nation wreckers or worse, provoke the destruction of our democracy because it has been thoroughly damned as inadequate by respectable public advocates who are pushing for changes to their advantage. It is even worse when in a moment of reflection, one discovers no inherent advantage in the new position being advocated.
Permit me to give examples. The so-called work of Parliament being seen as a rubber-stamp in certain cases and invitation to the President to interfere in the running of the business of the house by our advocates and intellectuals as if something strange and against the rules of parliamentary business is being done. 
The long-running argument over the passage into law of the Right to Information Bill or RTI for short, and lastly, the interesting fight over who becomes the next presiding member of the Kumasi Metropolitan Assembly.  
It would appear when our public advocates in our non-governmental organisations and others in our civic and civil society groups fail to get their way, they blame the system, rather than their unwillingness to accept and learn the simple truth that democratic government is government by persuasion, and lobbying, and that acceptance or rejection of any position is no indication of refusal of the system to address matters of public importance.
Democracy
Lobbying and persuasion do take time to achieve and realise its objectives, regardless of the inherent necessity or urgency of what is being lobbied for and who benefits. Even then, lobbying and persuasion must end in voting one way or another on the issue on the table. That is the kernel of democracy.  Its opposite is tyranny, dictatorship and the cutting of heads by leaders who have imposed themselves on us. 
Is that what our latter day civil society advocates want or desire?
I noticed this as far back on January 7, 2005, when Parliament was debating and eventually electing a new Speaker to replace the Right Honourable Peter Ala Adjetey who had been disowned and sacked for being impartial by his own New Patriotic Party (NPP) in Parliament which had the majority and, thus, the right to select a Speaker. 
Many of those of our public intellectuals and advocates who were curiously enough, angry and frustrated because according to them, the House was wasting time in electing a new Speaker, and delaying thereby, the swearing into office of President Kufuor to begin his second term in office.
The issue eventually ended in the election of the Right Honourable Sekyi-Hughes as the new Speaker of Parliament. One would have thought that the delay which had been widely condemned for being time-wasting and frivolous would have been cured by Parliament with the requisite constitutional amendment to separate the election and swearing-in of a new Speaker from that of the President occurring consecutively on the same day.
Nothing of the sort happened. Meaning, the entire cacophony was inspired not by genuine problems with the architecture of events on that day, but with the valiant effort of the Minority then led by Honourable Bagbin to have Honourable Adjetey re-elected. Then I realised that it was opposition to outcomes that our public intellectuals are against, and not procedure which are transparently obvious and democratic to all.
RTI bill
The same thing is happening right before our eyes with the escalating debate and arguments over the RTI bill. The process in Parliament, completely legal and in consonance with the standing orders, is being portrayed as being against the wishes of Ghanaians. Who told the supporters of this bill that they are campaigning for us? When I was in the US, I discovered that similar legislation was utilised by only a tiny fraction of both the journalistic profession and researchers in the academic community, in spite of its vaunted usefulness to democracy. Without RTI, this democracy would still be very genuine, and address our needs and requirements as a people.
Demonising Parliament for the sake of a pet elitist idea not central to how we govern ourselves is unfortunate. Why should the House stop other business which appears more pressing to it to deal with a matter on which consensus on both necessity and urgency have not being crafted and agreed beforehand? Bringing in the President makes these advocates look painfully ignorant of how our democracy and constitutional architecture work.
This alleged delay, of course, feeds into the utterly indefensible and self-created perception that our Parliament is a rubber-stamp of the executive. The job of each arm of government is not to frustrate the others, but  rather to facilitate governance.  Else, there will be no government possible. This is so obvious and plain that I wonder each time I hear it from our public advocates and intellectuals whether they really want the system to work, and get their ideas passed into law eventually, or they don’t.
No matter how clever and patriotic ones ideas or proposals are, they still have to be accepted by the majority before they can become law, and, thus, persuasion is the currency of our democratic system of government. No Parliament in the world can get any work done if it is full of rebels, each with a cause that conflicts with others. It is no credit to the intelligence and cleverness of our public advocates when they seem to be promoting rebellion instead of consensus about how elected assemblies go about their business.
The same unfounded frustration is clear in the Kumasi City Council impasse. If it is true that the work of the assembly is being impeded by lack of agreement on a new presiding member and also a new MCE, that would be a more powerful impetus to consensus and effective provision of local government than the insults and abuse being hurled at people with differences on a matter dear to them.
Our democracy was crafted and purposely designed to take cognisance of differences in opinion over public issues. It is ignoring those issues or riding roughshod over them that constitutes behaviour dangerous to the health of our system of governance.
aburaepistle@hotmail.com"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"266"	2016-09-29	" By Colin Essamuah  
 The title of this piece, and the subject for today inferentially, came to me when I was listening to morning radio discussions on vexing public issues last Wednesday.  I was struck by the deliberate ignorance of a majority of our public advocates and intellectuals on the basic meaning and implications of democratic government. It seems to me that condemning outcomes one disagrees with has now been effectively conflated with opposition to the utility of democratic rule.
 It appears when one is having problems with the outcome of a particular decision making process, one goes on and on to condemn the whole structure and architecture of our democracy. This, of course, invests a perfect working system with a depressing lack of legitimacy, and reduces mass support for our type of government.
 This is an extremely grievous mistake, and may well in an insidious way, invite nation wreckers or worse, provoke the destruction of our democracy because it has been thoroughly damned as inadequate by respectable public advocates who are pushing for changes to their advantage. It is even worse when in a moment of reflection, one discovers no inherent advantage in the new position being advocated.
 Permit me to give examples. The so-called work of Parliament being seen as a rubber-stamp in certain cases and invitation to the President to interfere in the running of the business of the house by our advocates and intellectuals as if something strange and against the rules of parliamentary business is being done.
 The long-running argument over the passage into law of the Right to Information Bill or RTI for short, and lastly, the interesting fight over who becomes the next presiding member of the Kumasi Metropolitan Assembly.
 It would appear when our public advocates in our non-governmental organisations and others in our civic and civil society groups fail to get their way, they blame the system, rather than their unwillingness to accept and learn the simple truth that democratic government is government by persuasion, and lobbying, and that acceptance or rejection of any position is no indication of refusal of the system to address matters of public importance.Democracy
 Lobbying and persuasion do take time to achieve and realise its objectives, regardless of the inherent necessity or urgency of what is being lobbied for and who benefits. Even then, lobbying and persuasion must end in voting one way or another on the issue on the table. That is the kernel of democracy.  Its opposite is tyranny, dictatorship and the cutting of heads by leaders who have imposed themselves on us.
 Is that what our latter day civil society advocates want or desire?
 I noticed this as far back on January 7, 2005, when Parliament was debating and eventually electing a new Speaker to replace the Right Honourable Peter Ala Adjetey who had been disowned and sacked for being impartial by his own New Patriotic Party (NPP) in Parliament which had the majority and, thus, the right to select a Speaker.
 Many of those of our public intellectuals and advocates who were curiously enough, angry and frustrated because according to them, the House was wasting time in electing a new Speaker, and delaying thereby, the swearing into office of President Kufuor to begin his second term in office.
 The issue eventually ended in the election of the Right Honourable Sekyi-Hughes as the new Speaker of Parliament. One would have thought that the delay which had been widely condemned for being time-wasting and frivolous would have been cured by Parliament with the requisite constitutional amendment to separate the election and swearing-in of a new Speaker from that of the President occurring consecutively on the same day.
 Nothing of the sort happened. Meaning, the entire cacophony was inspired not by genuine problems with the architecture of events on that day, but with the valiant effort of the Minority then led by Honourable Bagbin to have Honourable Adjetey re-elected. Then I realised that it was opposition to outcomes that our public intellectuals are against, and not procedure which are transparently obvious and democratic to all.RTI bill
 The same thing is happening right before our eyes with the escalating debate and arguments over the RTI bill. The process in Parliament, completely legal and in consonance with the standing orders, is being portrayed as being against the wishes of Ghanaians.
 Who told the supporters of this bill that they are campaigning for us? When I was in the US, I discovered that similar legislation was utilised by only a tiny fraction of both the journalistic profession and researchers in the academic community, in spite of its vaunted usefulness to democracy. Without RTI, this democracy would still be very genuine, and address our needs and requirements as a people.
 Demonising Parliament for the sake of a pet elitist idea not central to how we govern ourselves is unfortunate. Why should the House stop other business which appears more pressing to it to deal with a matter on which consensus on both necessity and urgency have not being crafted and agreed beforehand? Bringing in the President makes these advocates look painfully ignorant of how our democracy and constitutional architecture work.
 This alleged delay, of course, feeds into the utterly indefensible and self-created perception that our Parliament is a rubber-stamp of the executive. The job of each arm of government is not to frustrate the others, but  rather to facilitate governance.
 Else, there will be no government possible. This is so obvious and plain that I wonder each time I hear it from our public advocates and intellectuals whether they really want the system to work, and get their ideas passed into law eventually, or they don’t.
 No matter how clever and patriotic ones ideas or proposals are, they still have to be accepted by the majority before they can become law, and, thus, persuasion is the currency of our democratic system of government. No Parliament in the world can get any work done if it is full of rebels, each with a cause that conflicts with others.
 It is no credit to the intelligence and cleverness of our public advocates when they seem to be promoting rebellion instead of consensus about how elected assemblies go about their business.
 The same unfounded frustration is clear in the Kumasi City Council impasse. If it is true that the work of the assembly is being impeded by lack of agreement on a new presiding member and also a new MCE, that would be a more powerful impetus to consensus and effective provision of local government than the insults and abuse being hurled at people with differences on a matter dear to them.
 Our democracy was crafted and purposely designed to take cognisance of differences in opinion over public issues. It is ignoring those issues or riding roughshod over them that constitutes behaviour dangerous to the health of our system of governance.Writer's e-mail: aburaepistle@hotmail.com"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"267"	2016-09-26	" President John Dramani Mahama has lamented the delay in the passing of the Right to Information Bill, indicating that he does not know the progress of deliberations on the bill so far.
 “We have put in legislation aside from the constitution to guarantee access to freedom of information. I must say, unfortunately, it will go down in history as the legislation that has taken the longest in parliament. Cabinet approved it, we submitted it to parliament. … I do not know where it is,” he told dignitaries at a conference in Paris organised by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) on September 26.
 Mr Mahama who was speaking on the role of access to information in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) noted that the Bill “has been at the Committee level, the Committee decided to go round and consult with some saying it is too liberal. Others too are saying it is too tight and so parliament is still working on it”.
 He was, however, optimistic about its completion for citizens to have a legal basis for demanding information.
 The Right to Information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the country’s 1992 Constitution and recognised as a right under International Conventions on Human rights. The bill will give substance to Article 21 (1) (f) of the Constitution which states: “All persons shall have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.”
 Meanwhile, a group calling itself RTI Coalition, Ghana, issued a statement prior to Mr Mahama’s address at the conference indicating: “President Mahama has not demonstrated strong commitment to the passage of the RTI Bill, despite his party’s promises in their 2008 and 2012 manifestos.”
 “The RTI Coalition believes the selection of President Mahama to speak on such a day… presents an opportunity for the president to make concrete commitments on the passage of an effective and efficient RTI legislation before the current Parliament elapses in 2017.”"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"268"	2008-06-21	"Kokrobite (GAR), June 22, GNA - The Coalition on the Right to Information in Ghana at the weekend urged President John Agyekum Kufuor to ensure the passage of the bill to serve as a farewell legacy to round off the eight year administration of the ruling New Patriotic Party (NPP).
\"Democracy thrives on transparency; therefore, open governance must be supported and extended at a practical level as an absolute priority, passing the right to information bill and implementing an effective access to information regime is a simple, but extremely useful, step towards entrenching good governance,\" the RTI Coalition stated at a maiden National Advocacy Training Conference at Apraku, near Accra. The Coalition also urges government to remove legislative and bureaucratic practices in the bill that would hinder the implementation of the right to information bill when passed into law.
The RTI Coalition noted that Ghana stands to benefit tremendously from the passage of the RTI bill as it would lead to open governance, with its associated anti-corruption focus, would make the country more attractive to outside investors. Open government and information sharing also contributes to national stability.
Serious implementation of the right to information bill will also immediately set new standards for bureaucratic and parliamentary accountability. Public officials will be forced to recognise that, they work for the people's interest and that the people have the right to scrutinise their activities, the Coalition noted.
The Coalition membership includes; Ghana National Association of Teachers (GNAT), Ghana Journalists Association, (GJA), Commonwealth Human Rights Initiatives, Media Foundation for West Africa, Ghana Bar Association (GBA), Ghana Centre for Democratic Development (CDD), Public Archives Administration and Records Department, and Third World Network. Others are; Institute for Democratic Governance (IDEG), Ghana News Agency, (GNA), Ghana Medical Association (GMA), Ghana National Education Campaign Coalition, Amnesty International Ghana Section, Institute for Information and Development, Ghana Integrity International and Bawku Literary Initiatives.
The Coalition debunked the notion that RTI would be used by Journalists to pursue public officials unduly, noting that in participatory democracy, the right to information is particularly relevant and essential to ensure good governance. \"It is only when those who are to participate in governance are well informed that they can contribute meaningfully to governance.this can only be achieved if they have access to the relevant information,\" the Coalition noted.
The Coalition explained that importance of the right to information and the desire to ensure that there is transparency in governance, constitute the foundation for empowering the citizenry to contribute to the good governance for rapid development and progress of the nation.
In apparent responses to the demand of the Coalition Members, Mrs Chinery Hesse, President's Chief Special Advisor said Government is currently working fervently to get the RTI bill passed. She explained that passing the Right to Information law would redefine the relationships between the people and the government at the local and national levels, and help strengthen the social contract that exists between citizens and the government. She said Government recognizes that passing the RTI bill into law backed by the Whistleblower law would empower the people to meet their civic responsibilities to the state by reporting criminal and unethical acts that might jeopardize the promotion of democracy and human rights in Ghana. \"We understand that government exists to serve the people's interest and runs on the taxes paid by people. Citizens therefore have a right to know how their money is being used and how the country's affairs are being run. \"It follows logically that passing the RTI bill into law by parliament will promote good governance, and contribute toward checking systemic corruption and abuse of power, which negatively impact our democracy and national development.
\"Its passage may be taking longer than expected, but I believe you agree with me that it is better to put the bill to scrutiny before passing it into law,\" Mrs Chinery Hesse stated in a paper delivered on her behalf by Dr Nick Fobih a Policy Advisor at the Office of the President.
She commended civil society organizations for the important role they play in democracy and national development.\"sometimes we tend to ignore this fact and only perceive civic organizations as struggling with the state for political space and hegemony. The world has been shaped into a tri-polar system with governments, businesses and civil society, contributing to democracy and development in their respective unique ways. This tri-polar system has promoted checks and balances in public policy, resulting in increased transparency and accountability in governments' institutional framework and fiscal policy. Mrs Chinery Hesse said, providing the right to information to citizens was a step in the right direction as Ghana's democracy has been touted as a model in Africa, and the developing world, so we should all work towards moving Ghana forward on the right path towards democratic consolidation."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"269"	2016-09-23	"President John Dramani Mahama has been chosen to deliver the keynote address at the first International Day for Universal Access to Information (IDUAI) on 26 September 2016.
This has renewed the advocacy by the Coalition of the Right to Information Law in Ghana for the country’s parliament to pass the Right to Information bill. In the group’s estimation, Mr Mahama and his government have not shown much commitment to pushing the bill.
Mr Mahama is scheduled to speak on ‘Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions’, specifically elaborating on the role of media and access to information in promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, promoting access to justice for all and on building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
The event, which is aimed at highlighting the key importance of access to information in the success of implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), will bring other guest speakers including journalists, non-governmental organisations, workers, entrepreneurs, academics, and several others to share their experience and ideas on 11 SDGs with emphasis on how access to information will help in achieving them.
The RTI Coalition, in a statement, said it “believes that the selection of President Mahama to speak on such a day as the IDUAI and on such a topic, even though ironic, given that Ghana has failed for more than a decade to put in place an access to information legislation, presents an opportunity for the president to make concrete commitments on the passage of an effective and efficient RTI legislation before the current parliament lapses in 2017”.
It added: “The Coalition would like to remind President Mahama that the progress to secure the review and passage of the RTI Bill since 2013, when H.E resubmitted the Bill before parliament, has been very slow. In June 2016, the consideration of the Bill was stalled due to the lack of political will by the current parliament to prioritise the consideration of the Bill as they promised. 
“As a Coalition, we are concerned that President Mahama has not demonstrated strong commitments to the passage of the RTI Bill despite his party’s commitment to same in their 2008 and 2012 manifestos. Being an election year, the failure by the sixth parliament to pass the Bill before its tenure lapses would mean that the process will have to commence all over again with the new government and the new parliament. As a result of this, the Coalition sent a petition to President Mahama through the Chief of Staff on August 18, 2016, asking him to deliver on his party’s previous manifesto promises on the RTI Bill. Till date, the Coalition has not received any response to the petition.
“It is interesting to read the NDC’s 2016 manifesto promising as part of its 2017-2021 commitments to ‘implement the Right to Information Bill when passed by Parliament, same promise that was made in 2012. However, the 2016 manifesto omitted the very relevant part of the 2012 manifesto on the passage of the Bill as follows: ‘The next NDC administration will…work with the legislature to prioritise the passage of the Freedom of Information Act’, meaning that government is not committed to engaging parliament to ensure the passage of the Bill before and even after the elections. Does this mean that Ghanaians should wait for another four years before this law is put in place? As the Co-Chair of Eminent persons on the SDGs and given that UNESCO’s celebration this year is focused on ‘powering sustainable development with public access to information’, shouldn’t the passage of an RTI law in His Excellency’s own country be a priority now?
“We would like (President Mahama) to know that Ghana as the beacon of democracy in Africa, as he emphasised at the recent UN General Assembly (UNGA), is behind in terms of promoting access to information for citizens to effectively participate in governance and make informed choices. Several other African countries including countries in transition have successfully passed the law. For example: South Sudan, Guinea, Niger, Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Togo, Nigeria, Rwanda and most recently Kenya and Tanzania to mention but a few, have all passed the law.”"	16	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0
"270"	2016-08-02	"“The crusade against corruption will actually go into high gear if we make information available… we need to get that [the RTI bill], Senior Adjunct Fellow at the IEA, Professor Atsu Ayee, has said.
He feels the immediate passage of the RTI Bill is the way to go in tackling corruption head on in the country.
Prof. Aryee made the remarks while presenting a report on the findings of a survey on the root causes of corruption in Ghana at a round table discussion this morning, put together by the  Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA).
The survey suggests that the high clamor for quick riches, greed and selfishness as well as low salaries, are among the top three root causes of corruption in Ghana.
It also states that Ghanaians mainly pay bribes either to avoid official payments, or to be treated fairly, or as an obligatory payment to supervisors.
About 90% of Ghanaians believe that corruption is very high in Ghana, Prof Aryee noted in his remarks.
 But Prof. Aryee said that “If we get that(RTI), it will be easier for us even to question about how do they get money? How do they build a house, etc?”"	14	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0
"271"	2016-08-02	"A report from a survey on the root causes of corruption in Ghana by the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) says the unbridled levels of graft in the country are attributable to “greed and selfishness.”
The report further added that the quest to “get rich quick and lack of clear rules and laws” including absence of ethics, punitive and deterrent sanctions” are also blamable.
Presenting the survey’s findings Tuesday, Professor Atsu Ayee, Senior Adjunct Fellow at the IEA, stated the findings were disturbing as 90% of Ghanaians believe that corruption is very high in Ghana.
As a result, he called for the immediate passing into law the Right to Information bill explaining that it will lead the way to the anti corruption campaign in Ghana.
“The crusade against corruption will actually go into high gear if we make information available… we need to get that [the RTI bill]. If we get that, it will be easier for us even to question about how they get money? How do they build a house, etc?” he said."	14	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0
"272"	2016-07-30	"The Member of Parliament for Ho West Constituency, Emmanuel Bedzrah has laid the blame for the failure in passing the Right to Information (RTI) bill at the doorsteps of Parliament.
According to him, Parliament has the prerogative to make laws and they have the control to decide which laws are passed and which are not.
Speaking on GH One TV's morning show ‘GH Today’ Friday, the NDC lawmaker cited the inability of Parliament to pass the Constitutional Amendment as one of Parliament’s show of power. He implied that if the RTI bill is still not passed Parliament should take the fault for that and the Executive should not be drawn into that discussion.
“We believe that we make the rules, we are masters of our own rules and we can do whatever we have to do. Look at what happened recently when were supposed to move the Constitutional Amendment, Parliament decided that we will not move it,” Emmanuel Bedzrah opined on Hard Talk with hosts Kafui Dey and Baisiwa Dowuona-Hammond.
He continued: “So it means that Parliament can take decisions to agree or disagree on certain things. So it is not about the Executive. So I’m saying that if Parliament wants to pass it [RTI] today, they will pass it today. So for me we should hold Parliament responsible.”
Honorable Bedzrah insisted that the Executive should be absolved from any blame whatsoever when it comes to the inability to pass the RTI bill. He said in his opinion the President has demonstrated his commitment to the passage of the bill and the onus is on Parliament to move it.
“A lot of people will put the blame on the Executive behind the scene that they are twisting the hands of Parliament but on this occasion I want to say no. The executive does not have a hand in it. Because the President has made commitment in the US when we went for OGP-International Open Government Partnership meeting and he said to the whole world that this time round, the Executive has finished their work, they have given it to Parliament, the legislature to pass the bill. And Parliament is now the rightful owner of the RTI bill.”"	14	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0
"273"	2016-07-28	"The Coalition on the Right to Information is worried about the slow pace at which Parliament is considering the Right To Information Bill.
According to group, they were thrilled at the speed with which the Speaker, Rt. Hon. Edward Doe Adjaho led the legislature to start considering the Bill, believing that momentum and spirit would be sustained until final passage of the Bill into an Act.
However, they are saddened that Parliament has lost steam and as a result relegated the RTI Bill to the background to consider other Bills of interest.
The Speaker, the group alleged “appears to have lost interest in the RTI Bill” having promised the public that he would prioritized it “in this sitting”.
In the view of the group, the Speaker was “only pretending to be interested in pushing Parliament to consider the Bill in the interest of the people”, noting that “the two weeks daily discussion was only to enable Ghana show progress on the Bill at the UN session in Geneva where Ghana was expected to report on the Bill”.
“So, they did that to be able to report and not in the interest of the people or not because anybody was committed”, said the Coalition at a press conference in Accra on Thursday.
They had met to interact with journalists to question President John Mahama and Parliament whether they are fully committed in passing the RTI Bill.
In a statement read by the co-Chair of the Coalition to Right To Information, Vitus Azeem, the group argued that both Executive and the Legislature have demonstrated that the passage of the RTI Bill into an Act is not a priority in their scheme of things, stressing that there are cost implications for their actions.
“The Coalition would like His Excellency to note that the failure to pass the RTI Bill this year, 2016, will mean firstly, that the NDC Government has again lied not only to Ghanaians but to the international community about its commitment to the passage of the RTI Bill. Secondly, it would that Ghana has failed for the second time to fulfill her obligations under the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative as well as the country’s obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Thirdly, the failure to pass the RTI Bill this year will mean that the NDC government cannot be trusted and that government’s proclaimed commitments to the fight against corruption are mere words without action”, the statement in part read.
They added “We would also like our Parliamentarians to tell us whose interest they are actually serving. When loans are brought to Parliament, we see Parliamentarians turn out en-mass to endorse those loans so that government can borrow more money and put the country in more debt however, the law that will give them the right information to enable them as well as the citizenry effectively scrutinize these loans and ensure that they are properly utilized has the support of only a handful of MPs. What excuse will our MPs give for not passing the RTI Bill in this sitting?”
Ghana, the group added, will lose credibility on the international platforms due to several promises made on the several of such platforms by the government.
That aside, the West African nation could be suspended from the OGP partnership.
To save Ghana from sanctions, the group wants the Executive to engage Parliament to, as a matter of urgency, pass the Right to Infor mation Bill with the amendments before the 6th Parliament lapses in January 2017."	14	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0
"274"	2016-07-17	" After years of strenuous struggles to get the bill on the Right to Information (RTI) passed into law, to sanitize public spending  and records on them seems to be suffering from feet dragging in parliament by most of those required to expedite work on it.
 The current government has promised to pass the RTI Bill into law this year and currently it is before Parliament for consideration and approval.
 The document which has been in the House since 2003 is at the Consideration stage where amendments to certain clauses are being affected.
 However in spite of the desire of the larger members of the public especially the Coalition of the Right To Information to get work on the bill speeded up, there are fears that the long-awaited Right to Information bill which has been in parliament for more than a decade may not be passed into law after all, as parliament does not appear eager to pass it, with only five months left to bring the current session of parliament to a close.
 What is more disheartening is that other bills especially on the election in November and those on loans are being considered under certificates of urgency.
 According to Hon. George Loh, Member of Parliament for North Dayi, and ranking member of the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee of parliament, the bill has been delayed due to some technicalities, ambiguities, knotty clauses, some apprehensions and disagreements associated with some of its provisions.
 Briefing a reporter on the sidelines of a workshop on “Consolidating Ghana’s Anti Corruption Effort: Building Consensus to Address the Existing Gaps in Ghana”, organized by the Ghana Integrity Initiative in Accra, Hon. George Loh intimated that he has always pushed for the passage of the beleaguered bill but some of his colleagues feel reluctant to do same as a result of clauses that seek to make them susceptible to public scrutiny.
 “Let me say it here and now, that some members of parliament feel they would be exposed to ridicule and scrutiny if the bill is passed into law in its current state… My colleagues have intentionally refused to pass it, by dragging their feet to stall this important bill. Even some chiefs, heads of corporations, ministries of state and others call me daily, and tell me to sit on the bill in order to protect them against public ridicule and prosecution”, he revealed.
 Hon. George Loh continued that some NGOs, opinion leaders, the media, CSOs, the Ghana Bar Association etc. have been calling on the committee to expedite action on the bill, but some of his colleagues have deliberately put it on the back burner by going back to ask already answered questions on some clauses, in an attempt to delay the passage of the bill.
 The bill as it stands now has about 116 clauses. Out of these clauses only 20% of them have been tackled. It therefore pre-supposes that, given the elections in sight and the fact that parliament rises for recess at the end of July, the bill will be still-born under the current parliament.
 “I want to also draw your attention to the fact that we have 18 other bills lined up for discussion and passage before we rise; especially Constitutional Instrument 91 (CI91). Besides we put premium on loans and economic bills, so we do not as a matter of fact, put same tag on all bills”, he intimated.
 The legislator expressed his frustration over the slow progress made towards the passage of the bill, which in his view has a huge potential to reduce corruption in the country. “Some of us are poised to pass the bill frankly speaking, but we are seriously obstructed by our colleagues and some influential people in the country who feel threatened.
 But I shall continue to do my best; if it can be sneaked through and if we are lucky, it may happen”, he assured Ghanaians.
 George Loh has said there will be some exemptions in the Right To Information (RIT) Bill to safeguard the interest of the State.
 He is harboring the fear that if those measures are not put in place, the country will be so opened up to the extent that certain vital information that borders on national security could easily be accessed.
 When that happens, he said the security of the country especially that of the presidency  would be compromised where the lives of the citizenry would be at risk.
 George Loh seems not alone in his expression of fear, the Second Deputy Speaker of Parliament and Minority Leader, Joe Ghartey and Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu once cautioned that if care is not taken in passing the RTI Bill into law in its present state, the Presidency will be at risk irrespective of the oath of secrecy that has been sworn.
 The situation as it is currently does not sit well with the majority of people and therefore require some action to be taken to lobby or enforce action by our legislators.
 To this end member organizations have called for an emergency meeting of the coalition on RTI to deliberate on the position of the bill in parliament.  It is the desire of that entire parliament will back the current government by living up to its vow to get the bill passed before the end of this election yearWriter is a Executive Director Eanfoworld for Sustainable Development. E-mail: abdulai.alhasan@gmail.com/eanfoworld@yahoo.com"	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"275"	2016-07-16	" Accountability and fear of transparency have been described  by  many as  the reason for  the lack of enthusiasm  on  the part of successive  governments to pass  the Right  to Information(RTI) Bill which  has  been  in and  out  of  Parliament for more  than a  decade.
 Though the relevance of the Bill cannot be overemphasized, the implications for not passing a law for citizens' right to information are indications that successive governments are afraid of transparency and accountability in their affairs.
 The Right to Information Bill drafted  over  ten years ago and designed in accordance with Article (1) (f) of the1992 Constitution of Ghana gives the Ghanaian public the right to access official information which is held by a government agency.
 The bill which was proposed in 1998 has still not been passed for over a decade though the country has changed governments four times.
 Operating behind a thick curtain of official secrecy, public servants and political heads of Metropolitan  Municipal and District Assemblies  have displayed incredible reluctance to release to researchers, media practitioners and citizens official information considered vital and in the public interest.
 Ghanaians need   the law to enable them expose many acts of corruption, illegality and immorality in public affairs that has bedeviled the country and to ensure that there is openness in public affairs at all time.
 The Right to Information Law will provide a strong incentive against corruption. It will scare off corrupt officials. It may not change those who have chosen to be corrupt, but it will help to expose them and deter others. Today, in our country and probably in many other places, a major challenge in the fight against corruption is the availability of evidence.
 Governments respond to demands for the prosecution of perceived corrupt officials by claiming a lack of evidence. Lack of evidence actually means lack of information. When we pass  the RTI Bill into law it will help citizens and journalists to access official information that might help in detecting and/or prosecuting corruption. The Law will seek to prevent the destruction of documents so that those caught burning official documents can be brought to book.
 It is important to note that access to information formed the oxygen of democracy and Ghana must  follow  the examples of  the 11 African countries including Nigeria, South Africa, Guinea and Zimbabwe that  had all passed the freedom of information laws.
 Even though President John Dramani Mahama has indicated on countless  occasions his readiness to  accent  the bill   and make  it enforceable  the very day it is  brought before  him information gathered  by Public Agenda as  per our  lead- story, points to the fact that the bill may not go through this year.
 RTI law, according to anti- graft campaigners would at least provide the citizenry an instrument to make the appropriate demands to know what exists and what happens on issues that affects their lives and also promote democratic interests and rights.
 We of Public Agenda still wonder why the passage of the bill had delayed for the past 15 good years and we fear the bill might not be  passed anytime soon.
 Public Agenda therefore, urges civil society groups and organisations, students, professional associations and religious bodies to add their voices to the call for the passage of the RTI Bill.
 Given this crucial relevance of the Bill, Parliament should endeavour to undertake an elaborate public sensitization and consultations before passing the RTI Bill into law. And when passed into Law, Government should ensure that there is adequate infrastructure to support effective implementation of this all important law."	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"276"	2016-07-04	"The Coalition on the Right To Information in Ghana has expressed worry at the seeming silence of Ghana’s Parliament on the passage of the Right To Information (RTI) bill despite assurances by the Speaker of Parliament Edward Doe Adjaho that the bill’s passage will be prioritised by the house.
The Coalition in a statement said: “The Speaker of Parliament on May 17th 2016 singled out the RTI Bill as a Bill to be prioritised for passage into law in this session, what has changed? Given that the Bill has only been discussed twice in the last three weeks. Following the Speakers announcement on May 17th, the RTI Bill was taken on a daily basis in the weeks that ensued (May 18th – 20th and May 24th – 27th). However, in the last three weeks (June 14th – 17th, June 21st – 24th and June 27th – 30th) the Bill has only been taken twice (on Thursday June 16th and on Thursday June 23rd).
The statement further asked Parliament a set of questions regarding the bill. “Was the Speaker’s statement of prioritising the Bill and the momentum with which the Bill was discussed following the Speaker’s statement, merely to draw the public’s attention away from the Bill and minimise the demand for the call for the passage of the Bill? We (Coalition) recall that the Speaker noted on March 9, 2016: ‘I keep on receiving communications from various citizens of this country on this Bill’.
“Is there a deliberate attempt to stall the consideration of the RTI Bill so that Parliament will have a reason to say that they tried but could not pass the RTI Bill due to the numerous amendments? Given that we are in an election year, is Parliament trying to push the burden of passing the RTI Bill to the next Parliament? If the amendments are too many, does it not make sense to keep at it with all diligence so that it is finished in due time? Of what value will the fine work that the Select Committee did on the Bill, as has always been talked about by the Majority Leader, be if the Bill is not passed by this Parliament? A new Parliament may not support the proposed amendments made by the Select Committee on the Bill.
“We have noticed that Parliament has abandoned the RTI Bill and has started considering other Bills such as the Banks and Specialised Deposit –Taking Institutions Bill 2015 and the Ghana Geological Survey Authority Bill, 2015 and consideration is far advanced on those Bills. For example, over 150 clauses of the Banks and Specialised Deposit – Taking Institutions Bill 2015 has been considered unlike the RTI Bill – the Bill that is supposed to have been prioritised – which is still on clause 29. We have heard some MPs say that the RTI Bill is controversial which is why consideration has been slow but the question is – is the RTI Bill controversial? And for whom: Ghanaians or for politicians?
“Are our Parliamentarians really accountable to the people? Given the amount of money that has been expended in ensuring that the RTI Bill is passed into law, for example, in 2010, Parliament with funding from the World Bank, went on a nationwide tour to get the views of Ghanaians on the RTI Bill. After this costly exercise carried out in six regions, Parliament could not even produce a report, talk more of giving the people of Ghana the RTI Law. In 2012, again with funding from Star Ghana, Parliament convened two workshops in Koforidua to get the views of relevant stakeholders on the Bill and produced a good report, which if adopted by Parliament would make the Bill very robust and effective when passed, yet in 2016, the Bill is still at the consideration stage and with the current pace at which the consideration process is going, the Bill may not be passed this year. The implication of this will be that next year, the new Parliament will again be funded to carry out similar exercise all over again.”"	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"277"	2016-05-19	"Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation Minister Mahama Ayariga has justified the inclusion of exemption clauses in the Right to Information Bill.
Fears of possible abuse of the 10 exemption clauses, which include information relating to the Offices of the President, Vice President and Cabinet, led parliament to postpone the debate on the bill Thursday May 19.
According to the Bawku Central lawmaker, there is a need to ensure confidentiality of the advisors at the presidency and the information they give out to avoid victimisation.
“Any document, any information [which] is prepared for the president or vice president, which is in the nature of recommendation, advice etc., third parties cannot, under this act, request for that information. The idea is that the person preparing the information and giving an opinion has to be protected otherwise nobody will give an honest opinion because you are afraid that it will be known that you said it,” he told Class News’ parliamentary correspondent, Ekow Annan.
Meanwhile, Deputy Attorney General Dr Dominic Ayine is positive the bill will be passed before Parliament adjourns in July.
“This bill was first mooted by the then opposition New Patriotic Party in 2008 and the bill has gone through so many parliaments [and], so, many sessions of parliament and now we are determined as a house to enact the bill. …Hopefully we will pass it before the rise of parliament in July. The speaker made it very clear that he is determined to give us the opportunity to pass this bill and he is the one presiding, he is the leader of the house, and if that is his determination he is whipping all of us into line,” Dr Ayine said."	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"278"	2016-05-19	" Implementation of the Right to Information bill when passed into law will be challenging, Dr Steve Manteaw, Campaigns Coordinator for the Integrated Social Development Centre (ISODEC), has said.
 According to him, the manner information is kept, especially at the Ministries, Departments and Agencies, makes it difficult for persons who urgently need information to access it.
 Parliament is currently debating the draft bill on the RTI, but Dr Manteaw fears that when passed, there will still be implementation challenges. Magnus Kofi Amoatey, Chair of the Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, told Class FM’s Ekow Annan on Wednesday May 18 that efforts were being taken to pass the bill.
 Dr Manteaw, speaking in an interview with Prince Minkah, host of the Executive Breakfast Show (EBS) on Class 91.3 FM, Thursday May 19, said: “Sometimes, you may not be able to access a particular information not because the public office holder is unwilling to provide the information, but just because the manner in which the information has been kept makes it difficult to retrieve it,” adding: “Sometimes you go to the ministries, departments, and agencies, and to their storage facility you see tonnes and piles of records that have been kept in a dusty room and retrieving information from such a storage becomes difficult.”
 He, therefore, advised that when the bill is passed, steps should be taken to ensure that “we have the right institutional back-up to enable the implementation of the law.”
 For his part, Suleman Braimah, Executive Director of the Media Foundation for West Africa, said there was the need to pass an RTI law that would meet best practices and would not promote secrecy.
 “Countries like Ethiopia have passed a Right to Information law, but remain one of the most secretive and most repressive on the continent. Zimbabwe also passed an RTI [legislation] way back in 2000, and similarly other countries have passed them, but the restrictions and exemptions in them make those laws not different from what existed before their passage.”
 Meanwhile, an ardent crusader for the passage of the RTI bill into law in Ghana, Akoto Ampaw, has observed that if the RTI bill is passed into law, it will transform the political culture in Ghana in terms of the relationship between the government and the citizens.
 According to him, an RTI law will empower citizens to demand critical information from authorities since criminal charges may be levelled against institutions or anyone that fails to comply.
 Citing an example to buttress his point, Mr Akoto Ampaw said Ghanaians could have leveraged the law, were it in force, to have demanded answers from the Ghana Water Company Limited concerning a recent publication in the newspapers that suggested a study conducted by the Water Research Institute of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in 2009, showed the company’s treatment plants were incapable of removing algal toxins."	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"279"	2016-05-18	"Implementation of the Right to Information bill when passed into law will be challenging, Dr Steve Manteaw, Campaigns Coordinator for the Integrated Social Development Centre (ISODEC), has said.
According to him, the manner information is kept, especially at the Ministries, Departments and Agencies, makes it difficult for persons who urgently need information to access it.
Parliament is currently debating the draft bill on the RTI, but Dr Manteaw fears that when passed, there will still be implementation challenges. Magnus Kofi Amoatey, Chair of the Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, told Class FM’s Ekow Annan on Wednesday May 18 that efforts were being taken to pass the bill.
Dr Manteaw, speaking in an interview with Prince Minkah, host of the Executive Breakfast Show (EBS) on Class 91.3 FM, Thursday May 19, said: “Sometimes, you may not be able to access a particular information not because the public office holder is unwilling to provide the information, but just because the manner in which the information has been kept makes it difficult to retrieve it,” adding: “Sometimes you go to the ministries, departments, and agencies, and to their storage facility you see tonnes and piles of records that have been kept in a dusty room and retrieving information from such a storage becomes difficult.”
He, therefore, advised that when the bill is passed, steps should be taken to ensure that “we have the right institutional back-up to enable the implementation of the law.”
For his part, Suleman Braimah, Executive Director of the Media Foundation for West Africa, said there was the need to pass an RTI law that would meet best practices and would not promote secrecy.
“Countries like Ethiopia have passed a Right to Information law, but remain one of the most secretive and most repressive on the continent. Zimbabwe also passed an RTI [legislation] way back in 2000, and similarly other countries have passed them, but the restrictions and exemptions in them make those laws not different from what existed before their passage.”
Meanwhile, an ardent crusader for the passage of the RTI bill into law in Ghana, Akoto Ampaw, has observed that if the RTI bill is passed into law, it will transform the political culture in Ghana in terms of the relationship between the government and the citizens.
According to him, an RTI law will empower citizens to demand critical information from authorities since criminal charges may be levelled against institutions or anyone that fails to comply.
Citing an example to buttress his point, Mr Akoto Ampaw said Ghanaians could have leveraged the law, were it in force, to have demanded answers from the Ghana Water Company Limited concerning a recent publication in the newspapers that suggested a study conducted by the Water Research Institute of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in 2009, showed the company’s treatment plants were incapable of removing algal toxins."	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"280"	2016-05-17	"An ardent crusader for the passage of the Right To Information (RTI) bill into law in Ghana, Akoto Ampaw, has observed that if the RTI bill, currently before Parliament, is passed into law, it will transform the political culture in Ghana in terms of the relationship between the government and the citizens.
According to him, an RTI law will empower the citizens to demand critical information from the authority since criminal charges may be leveled against institutions or anyone that fails to comply.
Citing an example to buttress his point, Mr Akoto Ampaw said Ghanaians could have leveraged the law, were it in force, to have demanded answers from the Ghana Water Company Limited concerning a recent publication in the newspapers that suggested that a study conducted by the Water Research Institute of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in 2009, showed the Water Company’s treatment plants are incapable of removing algae toxins.
Civil society and pressure groups including the Ghana Coalition on Right To Information Law have been pressing upon Ghana’s Parliament to pass the bill to meet best practices.
When Parliament resumed from recess on Tuesday May 17, the RTI bill was mentioned as one of the bills that will be considered.
However, speaking on Metro TV’s Good Evening Ghana programme hosted by Paul Adom Otchere, on Tuesday May 17, Mr Akoto Ampaw revealed that the bill, in its current form, will rather be a hurdle to free access to information once passed into law since it has several defects.
He has, therefore, asked parliament to factor into the draft bill, the amendments made by the select committee on legal and constitutional affairs."	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"281"	2016-05-15	" Anti-corruption campaigners in  Ghana have vowed to monitor with keen interest the implementation of commitments and statements made by the government at the global anti-corruption summit convened by UK Prime Minister David Cameron,  last week.
 For the group, Ghana has not done too well in its fight against corruption, and therefore the need for concerted efforts to make meaningful progress. The UK Summit, in the view of the group, gives the President of the Republic an opportunity to move away from the rhetoric of fighting corruption into real action.
 “We are interested in monitoring. We will be tracking the commitments that the President made at the Summit, and we will hold him to these commitments,” they said in separate interviews with the Public Agenda.
 The campaigners include  the   Ghana  Integrity Initiative(GII), Ghana  Anti- Corruption Coalition(GACC),  the  Integrated  Social Development Centre (ISODEC), African Centre  for Energy Policy(ACEP), and the Natural Resources  Governance Institute(NRGI).
 President Mahama was among selected international leaders from across the world who gathered in London last week to initiate a global response to growing corruption tendencies, some of which proceeds go to finance terrorism activities and threaten global security.
 The summit sought to agree on a package of actions to tackle corruption across board, as well as deal with issues including corporate secrecy, government transparency, the enforcement of international anti-corruption laws, and the strengthening of international institutions.
 The  Corporate Affairs Manager of GII, Mr Michael Boadi told  Public Agenda  in  an interview  that   the stakes  in  the  fight against corruption are high, as the  country  is left  with  just  about six  months to election and that his outfit will be interested  in  examining the President's record  in combating corruption, especially measuring  the rhetoric with  his actions and inactions.
 “In the run-up to the 2016 elections, we will be interested in examining the President's record, and part of the record we want to examine is his commitment to fighting corruption.  We will  measure rhetoric with the  practice  so  it wouldn't  be  like  the  president is just talking; but  that when he speaks, he takes action.”
 According to him, the anti -graft organisation will be interested in monitoring and reporting on how these new anti- corruption commitments are transmitted into the country's legal framework and enforced.
 He mentioned that the GII  will particularly be monitoring the commitment on Beneficial Ownership  Disclosure as well as the Right to Information Bill, which has  been  the  topic  of  discussions among civil  society for more than a decade.
 On her part, the Acting Executive Secretary of the Ghana Anti-Corruption Coalition (GACC), Ms Beauty Emefa Nartey, pointed out the importance of not allowing the renewed global commitment to fighting corruption pass without interrogating its implications for Ghana. “We will need to distill for ourselves what these commitments mean to us, and how we work to achieve them,” she explained.
 Ms Nartey stated “We will look at matching the commitments with the President's action against corruption. Generally  we  expect that the  president  will be more proactive in his fight against corruption. He should exhibit or demonstrate his resolve in a way that convinces Ghanaians that he is ready to walk his talk.”
 For starters, she wants the President to take the implementation of the National Anti Corruption Action Plan (NACAP) seriously, and to subject it to periodic national reviews and progress assessment to make sure that the country stays the course of implementation.
 She emphasised the need for Parliament to pass the  RTI bill before  the close of the year so that citizens can use it to demand accountability from duty bearers.
 “The citizens' right to know is the only way to remove the incentive for rent-seeking and corruption on the part of public office holders, and so delaying the passage of the Bill into law amounts to providing cover for such nefarious activities with the attendant huge cost to the country's development” she posited rather strongly.
 Meanwhile President John Dramani Mahama has described the fight against corruption in Ghana as “an uphill task” and gone ahead to claim that significant progress has been made to win that fight.
 The president was speaking in an interview with the BBC on the sidelines of the just ended Anti-Corruption Summit in London. He said because of the exposure of acts of corruption, some people are accepting the perception of corruption as a reality.
 The president said “one of the things about countries like Ghana is that creating the environment where people are able to speak freely about corruption, heightens the perception of corruption. So it might be that because of the environment in which corruption is discussed, people have the perception that there is an increase in the perception of corruption.”
 President John Mahama, however, reiterated his call that persons who have evidence of corruption or suspect corrupt acts should report to the appropriate authorities to investigate.
 Last Friday's edition of the Public Agenda, however, suggested that most of these appropriate investigative authorities that the President refers to, are incapacitated by the fact that their heads are all in acting positions. The Paper mentioned, in particular, the Economic and Organised Crime Organisation (EOCO), the Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), the Registrar General's Department, and other equally important institutions such as the National Commission on Civic Education (NCCE), and the Petroleum Commission.
 The Public Agenda story has been corroborated by former President of Ghana John Jerry Rawlings during a courtesy call on him by the visiting Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, Dr. Keith Rowley.
 “The integrity of our political leaders is what we need most on this continent. Some of our institutions that should be exacting integrity out of us have gone weak with time,” President Rawlings stated when Dr. Rowley called on him at his office in Accra on Wednesday."	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"282"	2016-05-15	"Global summit on anti-corruption: what mr president should be telling the world
On 12th May, 2016, world leaders met in London, United Kingdom for the Global Anti-Corruption Summit. This meeting would provide an opportunity for world leaders to show case their commitment to the fight against corruption both locally and internationally. Clearly, Ghana’s participation at the upcoming summit marked yet another important step for the government of Ghana to demonstrate its commitment to the fight against corruption. 
The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Africa office would like to call on His Excellency, President John Dramani Mahama to make concrete commitments on the passage of an effective and efficient right to information legislation in Ghana.
Efforts by civil society organizations in Ghana to secure the passage of the right to information Bill has proved abortive for more than a decade. Several governments have made promises to put the legislation in place but failed to do so despite their proclaimed commitment to the fight against corruption. Ongoing conversations around open contracting and beneficial ownership have brought to the limelight the value of access to information in helping to expose those who make substantial economic gains but are able to hide their identities in the mist of opaque company structures. The availability of the means for the public to scrutinize activities of public institutions and private bodies performing public functions through guaranteed access to information helps in the fight against corruption and promotes transparency.  
If His Excellency got an opportunity to address the summit, CHRI expected  Mr. President to tell not only Ghanaians but the world at large how government has demonstrated efforts as part of the fight against corruption, to ensure the passage of the RTI Bill since he assumed power in 2012. 
We recall that Mr. President has on several platforms indicated that when the Bill gets to his table he would sign it without delay. But we have not heard the President requesting Parliament to, as a matter of urgency, pass the most important anti-corruption tool – the RTI Bill – into law. As much as we understand that the executive may not wish to interfere with the work of the legislature in the spirit of separation of powers; we also know that His Excellency, the President can request for the RTI Bill to be passed under a certificate of urgency if His Excellency so wishes; as has been the case with some other Bills.
We would like to draw the attention of Mr. President that under the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative, Ghana has for the second time running made commitments in its National Action Plan to pass the RTI Bill which has been in Parliament since 2013. Specifically, on transparency, the government of Ghana on behalf of the people of Ghana committed among other things, to lobby Parliament to pass the Bill by the end of, 2013. But three years on, the Bill is yet to be passed. The Bill currently at the consideration stage has thoroughly been reviewed by the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs since December 2014, making it a very robust and effective tool for fighting corruption.
Even though the Bill has gone through the first and second readings and has been referred to the consideration stage, Parliament has hastened very slowly with the consideration processes. There is currently no clear indication as to how Parliament is planning to ensure that the Bill is passed before the elections in November, 2016. There is also nothing to show that the Executive is lobbying or engaging Parliament, as it committed to do in its OGP action plans, to ensure that the Bill is passed before June 2016. 
As His Excellency makes further commitments at the Global Summit to eradicate corruption at home, it is our hope that he will also present a roadmap to the world and to Ghanaians on how he plans to fulfill governments OGP commitment to engage Parliament for the speedy passage of the RTI Bill before June 2016. 
ISSUED BY THECOMMONWEALTH HUMAN RIGHTS INITIATIVE (CHRI), AFRICA OFFICE, SECRETARIAT TO THE COALITION ON THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION, GHANA
MAY 2016
From Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative Ghana through 
EANFOWORLD FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
P.O.BOX 17070AN    233244370345/23327483710 /233208844791
abdulai.alhasan@gmail.com /eanfoworld@yahoo.com"	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"283"	2016-05-11	"Another exercise to prepare Ghanaians to choose their governors has been marred by violence and a fierce rivalry amongst the prospective competitors to boost their advantage in their perceived political strongholds through foul and illegal means. 
And to add insult to the injury of perverting our participatory democracy, the two main protagonists have pretended that each is holier than the other in their incessant use of skulduggery ways and means to add ineligible people to the voters register. 
The gall of it all is that both parties then join together to cry out in unison that the resulting register is bloated and that the Electoral Commission of Ghana must ‘clean’ the register to make it sufficiently credible for the impending election. 
All of this makes total nonsense of the ongoing legal battle to clean the register when those making the demand are feverishly engaged in adding ineligible minors and foreigners from our neighbouring countries to the register. 
In a refreshingly honest admission, the General Secretary of The NDC, ‘General Mosquito’ last week put the blame squarely on political parties when he said “We are the people who create the problems and we turn to blame the Electoral Commission.” 
Unfortunately, this honest admission was immediately ruined by Sammy Awuku of the NPP who called for the arrest of the General ‘Mosquito”, in a clearly botched attempt to claim the electoral lofty height of honest conduct. 
The foregoing narrative begs the question as to the real purpose and intent of those who seek our mandate to become our government; Is it their intention to offer selfless public service, or do they see governance as merely a means for their private gain? 
This question has exercised my mind for the past decade as I have attempted to assess my role in Ghana’s public and political life under the working title of “PG3, Public Good, Private Greed, Poor Ghana”. 
My thesis and my experience is summed up as follows: Whilst the purpose of entering public service is to contribute to the Public Good, the overwhelming majority of those who enter are in it for their private greed, and our motherland Ghana is the poorer for it.  
That to me is why Ghana has sunk into a quagmire over the almost 60 years of being Black Africa’s first independent country; only proving that all the black man is capable of doing is the rape of his country for his personal benefit. 
The 1992 Constitution sets out the purpose for seeking political power in very clear and unambiguous language, in the very first article, to wit:
(1) The Sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of Ghana in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of government are to be exercised in the manner and within the limits laid down in this Constitution” As I wrote last week, government must be in “our name and for our welfare.” 
Unfortunately, the process employed by politicians is so corrupt and tainted that it substitutes the intent of our constitution right from the word go. 
Those who seek to lead their own parties buy the allegiance of those who decide. 
The leaders and parties who then compete for our mandate do so by literally buying the votes through direct and indirect inducements. When power has been obtained, it is time to recoup the investment made to buy the votes, reward those who contributed to the investments by offering ‘juicy’ contracts and positions which bring personal gains, as well as appointing the ‘foot soldiers’ deployed to subvert the democratic practice of one eligible person, one vote. 
In the dispensations where I learned my politics, those who offer themselves for public office are helped to achieve their noble purpose. Others who believe in their fitness of purpose often knock on doors to fund the campaign of their noble fellow citizens. 
Now it’s all internet- based, alas Bernie Sanders’ US$27 average contribution, which has raked in more millions of dollars than the influence-seeking Super PACs. 
How do we know all of this? Simple really! 
It is called accounting to the people (in the real sense) because there are institutions and laws which ensure that politicians obey the underlying premise behind governing “in our name”, which to me means simply full disclosure to us all of the time in the use of our resources for our welfare.  
Alas when they get power, the politicians decide on what we should know and what we should not know, hence the 22 year gestation period of the RTI bill that is still not passed into law.
In this era of evidence-based assertions, one does not need to be a rocket scientist to deduce that looting has taken the place of service as the primary purpose for entering politics. 
When you see your contemporary attain extraordinary personal wealth whilst not visibly working as hard as you, it is more than likely that your mate is now a politician, and not just a politician, but belongs to the party in government. 
It is the search for the quickest way to alleviate personal poverty that drives most who seek political office. Unlike the Olympics, it is not about taking part; it is all about winning the power to govern. 
Since this entails getting 50% + 1 of those who vote on Election Day, registering ineligible minors and foreigners boosts your chances, hence the despicable spectacle that we have just witnessed in the recent limited registration exercise. 
It is just as well we did not embark on a full blown registration exercise to create a new voters register.
The result would have been a register that is probably bigger than the total population of Ghana. 
The blame lies squarely with our politicians and we must stop blaming the EC or asking it to fix all the self-inflicted problems that stem from the pursuit of loot instead of service by those who seek to govern in our name and on our behalf. 
By: Dr. Charles Wereko-Brobby 
Chief Policy Analyst, GIPPO"	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"284"	2016-05-11	"On 12th May, 2016, world leaders will be meeting in London, United Kingdom for the Global Anti-Corruption Summit. This meeting would provide an opportunity for world leaders to show case their commitment to the fight against corruption both locally and internationally.
Clearly, Ghana’s participation at the upcoming summit will mark yet another important step for the government of Ghana to demonstrate its commitment to the fight against corruption.
The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Africa office would like to call on His Excellency, President John Dramani Mahama to make concrete commitments on the passage of an effective and efficient right to information legislation in Ghana.
Efforts by civil society organisations in Ghana to secure the passage of the right to information Bill has proved abortive for more than a decade. Several governments have made promises to put the legislation in place but failed to do so despite their proclaimed commitment to the fight against corruption.
Ongoing conversations around open contracting and beneficial ownership have brought to the limelight the value of access to information in helping to expose those who make substantial economic gains but are able to hide their identities in the mist of opaque company structures.
The availability of the means for the public to scrutinize activities of public institutions and private bodies performing public functions through guaranteed access to information helps in the fight against corruption and promotes transparency.
If His Excellency gets an opportunity to address the summit, CHRI would like Mr. President to tell not only Ghanaians but the world at large how government has demonstrated efforts as part of the fight against corruption, to ensure the passage of the RTI Bill since he assumed power in 2012.
We recall that Mr. President has on several platforms indicated that when the Bill gets to his table he would sign it without delay. But we have not heard the President requesting Parliament to, as a matter of urgency, pass the most important anti-corruption tool – the RTI Bill – into law.
As much as we understand that the executive may not wish to interfere with the work of the legislature in the spirit of separation of powers; we also know that His Excellency, the President can request for the RTI Bill to be passed under a certificate of urgency if His Excellency so wishes; as has been the case with some other Bills.
We would like to draw the attention of Mr. President that under the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Initiative, Ghana has for the second time running made commitments in its National Action Plan to pass the RTI Bill which has been in Parliament since 2013.
Specifically, on transparency, the government of Ghana on behalf of the people of Ghana committed among other things, to lobby Parliament to pass the Bill by the end of, 2013. But three years on, the Bill is yet to be passed.
The Bill currently at the consideration stage has thoroughly been reviewed by the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs since December 2014, making it a very robust and effective tool for fighting corruption.
Even though the Bill has gone through the first and second readings and has been referred to the consideration stage, Parliament has hastened very slowly with the consideration processes. There is currently no clear indication as to how Parliament is planning to ensure that the Bill is passed before the elections in November, 2016.
There is also nothing to show that the Executive is lobbying or engaging Parliament, as it committed to do in its OGP action plans, to ensure that the Bill is passed before June 2016.
As His Excellency makes further commitments at the Global Summit to eradicate corruption at home, it is our hope that he will also present a roadmap to the world and to Ghanaians on how he plans to fulfill governments OGP commitment to engage Parliament for the speedy passage of the RTI Bill before June 2016.
ISSUED BY THE COMMONWEALTH HUMAN RIGHTS INITIATIVE (CHRI), AFRICA OFFICE, SECRETARIAT TO THE COALITION ON THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION, GHANA
MAY 2016"	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"285"	2016-04-29	"The Ghana Journalists Association (GJA) has asked for the quick passage of the Right to Information Bill with a call on parliament to cut down on draconian clauses likely to hamper access to information.
The bill was drafted in 2010. After years of review and continuous advocacy and queries by the UN for its passage, the bill has still not been passed.
At a public lecture to launch World Press Freedom Day 2016 at the International Press Centre in Accra Friday April 30, Chairman of the National Media Commission (NMC) Kwasi Gyan Apenteng said expeditious passage of the RTI bill will be beneficial to all.
“We must refuse to accept any legislation riddled with exceptions and claw-back clauses,” he told journalists.
“There is no point getting a Right to Information law that blacks out everything. So, you can have the law but when we have claw-back clauses added, in that case, indeed, that kind of legislation will be more useless than if we didn’t get it at all.”
Mr Gyan Apenteng said the RTI law would promote fairness and accountability.
He continued: “We need the Right to Information law to encourage journalists and society to question how we are governed and how national resources are used.
“It will promote fairness, accountability, and social justice, all being a cornerstone in the fight against corruption.
“In fact, the Right to Information [law] will also help everybody, especially even the politicians, who are not too keen on it because it will reduce journalists’ dependence on conjecture, rumour, leaks, and all other sources as we try to find information.”"	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"286"	2016-04-15	"By Alhaji Alhasan Abdulai
After years of agitations for the passage of the right to information bill into law in Ghana, our human right court in Accra has given indication that the law will be      effective when it comes into effect. as a result of a judgment on the recent controversy over the   right cost of the bus branding by a Ghanaian company, The court has ordered the government to release the agreement on the buses branding a               development that has gladdened the hearts of all well meaning Ghanaian including the   Coalition on the Right to Information who issued a press statement as follows 
The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) welcomes the judgment delivered by the High Court of     Justice (Human Rights Division 2) presided over by His Lordship Anthony K. Yeboah on 13thApril 2016,    which ordered the Attorney General and Ministry of Transport to furnish the applicants in the suit with  the relevant information relating to the branding of the 116 Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) buses. Specifically,   the Coalition would like to commend Citizen Movement against Corruption (CMaC) for supporting the    RTI advocacy by taking the bold step to initiate this suit.
The RTI Coalition believes that the judgment is a victory for Ghanaians and for citizens’ right to Access     information in particular. The judgment reinforces the need for the passage of an access to information  legislation in Ghana and most importantly for the speedy consideration of the proposed amendments by Parliament on the Right to Information Bill.
The RTI Coalition would like to draw the attention of the public to the fact that the judgment of the High Court has strongly buttressed the need for a Right to Information legislation in Ghana. The Coalitions     fully aware and has always been of the view that citizens have a right to access information and this        right is primarily inherent in the person as a human being and is also a constitutional right. In fact, His     Lordship Justice Anthony Yeboah puts it more succinctly and the Coalition agrees with him when he said ‘it is not the legislation that vests the right to the individual; the individual has the right to                      information  as  both human right and a constitutional right’.  However a Right to Information                legislation provides    the   various mechanisms by which citizens and indeed all persons can easily enjoy the constitutional       right   to access information. An RTI law sets out clear obligations for duty bearers   in terms of granting access,       including the timeframe within which requests for information should    be granted, in what format the     information should be provided, the fees to be paid, sanctions for the breach of the law as well as the     review/appeal processes to be followed where such a request is          denied.
It is true that one does not need an RTI legislation to be able to go to court to enforce the right as            specified under Article 21(1) (f); however, without the Right to Information law, the court becomes the ONLY  option for Ghanaians, including the less privileged and indigent persons. This in itself is a               DETERRENT     because access to justice comes with huge financial implications in addition to the delays associated      with the justice delivery system. Given the time sensitive nature of most information          requests, where court litigation is left as the only option, what may happen is that the information may no longer be relevant or even available after judgment is delivered. Furthermore, any delay in the court proceedings may also provide an opportunity for such sensitive information to be tampered with or       destroyed. With the Right to Information Law, citizens would have a hierarchy of administrative               procedures to follow where a request is denied leaving the court as the last option.
The Coalition would like to reiterate that a robust RTI legislation is still very relevant and necessary for   Ghana today. His Lordship confirmed this when he said “Even in the absence of a freedom of                    information legislation, … prudence demands that we learn from existing freedom of information        legislation in other jurisdictions and use them as a guide to help us decide whether it is prudent to give in to the demand of the applicants where they request that ‘all information relative to the contract be disclosed’”. An effective Right to Information Law addresses all issues relating to exemptions as His Lordship alluded to and specifies under what circumstances information disclosure will be exempted. Such  legislation also requires public institutions to proactively disclose information and itemizes the kinds of   information that ought to be proactively disclosed which is lacking in the current judgment.
We humbly submit that Ghana as a beacon of democracy should be working towards ensuring the          passage of progressive legislation such as  a right to information law that conforms to the African Union Model Law and International Best Practice.
Specifically, the Bus Branding judgment addressed the issues brought before the court which is the         disclosure of information relating to the branding of the BRT buses. The judgment did not address the     mechanics of accessing information generally from public institutions and what the responsibilities    of   the  public officials would be in granting access, meaning that legislation is still needed to flesh out these details.
The general principle governing Right to information laws is that a requester does not need to justify     why he or she is seeking the information requested because it is a fundamental human right.   It would  be as absurd as requiring that to exercise one’s right to free expression, one must first give the reason    why one wishes to exercise that right!  Best practice principles however require that where a requester  requires the information for the exercise of a fundamental human right to physical safety, liberty etc.     and therefore the time line for providing the information is to be drastically reduced from the norm, the        requester ought to indicate the purpose for which he/she requests the information.  This is simply to     aid more rapid and urgent disclosure process.  Otherwise, a person is under no obligation to give the        reason why he/she requires the information as a basis for the disclosure of the information.  Indeed,      the proposed amendment to the Bill currently before Parliament upholds this principle Again, where      the information is in the custody of a private person, some right to information legislation requires that     the   requester provides reason for the request.
In the Branded Bus’s case the applicants had to demonstrate why they were seeking for the information. This is contrary to well-established principles governing request of information from public bodies        under a democratic right to information legal regime. Furthermore, another aspect of the otherwise       progressive judgment of the High Court was the order that the Applicants pay as much as GHC1, 000.00  for the information requested. This fee was not determined by an examination of the volume of documents that were to be given to the applicants by the state. The principle governing fees for information           requested is ancillary to the fact that right to information is a fundamental human right. Accordingly,   the scale of fees for access to information ought to be the minimum possible so that a person’s financial circumstances, as far as possible do not become an obstacle to his/her access to information.  It is for    this reason that most right to information legislation provides that the fee to be charged should simply  be what is required to reproduce the information sought.  In our candid view therefore the amount of   GHC1, 000.00 seems with respect to be unduly excessive.  Perhaps, the Court could have ordered that    the Applicants pay so much, for instance 15 pesewa for every page of the information requested for.    With a Right to Information law in place, public institutions would be expected to charge only a minimal  fee, related to the cost of reproducing the information requested for.
While we commend the High court for this ground breaking decision, we wish to urge our Parliamentarians to speed up the consideration processes for the passage of the RTI Bill and to pass the Bill, with the    critical amendments proposed by the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary         Affairs before November 2016. Indeed it has become even more urgent for government to ensure that   the    Right to Information Bill is passed now, and we could not agree more with the Court when it stated ‘the     legislation may be passed to set out the mode of application for the information sought, the officer responsible for handling the application, the time frame for responding to the application and    what is off-limits…’
Executive Director
EANFOWORLD FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
P.O.BOX 17070AN    233244370345/23327483710 /233208844791
abdulai.alhasan@gmail.com /eanfoworld@yahoo.com"	13	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"287"	2016-03-20	"West African governments have been urged to create and maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment for journalists and media professionals to perform their work professionally and without undue interference.
A communique issued by participants at the just ended West Africa Conference on Media and Participatory Governance urged governments who were still to adopt the Right to Information (RTI) Bill to ensure effective and timely access to information online and offline for all citizens and media personnel through the adoption of the Bill.
The two-day conference, on the theme: “Promoting Professional Journalism for Good Governance in West Africa,” was organised by the Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA), with funding from The Open Society Initiative for West Africa, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, the United States Embassy, and the Global Partners Digital.
It brought together media development organisations and experts from all 16 countries in West Africa.
“We also urge the ECOWAS to adopt a regional framework on access to information in line with the Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance.
“We commend the governments of Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Niger, Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire for passing the RTI Bills and encourage them to further ensure effective implementation of the Bills.
“We urgently call on all media owners, managers, editors and journalists in the region to pay strong attention to the issue and take steps to improve professional standards,” the communique said."	12	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"288"	2016-02-21	"The National Democratic Congress (NDC) has outlined its policy position on managing the country’s oil and gas resources through improved access to information to boost transparency and competitive bidding of oil blocks.
The party’s energy policy aims to enhance the efficiency and competitiveness of the economy through provision of low-cost but high-quality energy inputs to ensure industrial and domestic use while safeguarding sustainable environment.
Commenting on the policy paper, Dr Kwame Ampofo, the Chairman of the Energy Commission, told the Ghana News .
Agency that the policy promised greater transparency, accountability, monitoring and evaluation to shore up and better manage oil revenues towards improved living conditions.
He said the element of verification and the linkage of oil and gas management to the Right to Information (RTI) bill which had been fused into the party’s policy document made the policy unique.
“I think additional elements are the issues of verification, the stakeholders must be able to verify what the administrators of the sector [oil and gas] are doing, so we are going to ensure certain legislations are passed to enhance monitoring, evaluation and establishment of accountability,” he said.
“For the oil and gas sector to be properly managed, you need to have transparency, you need to have accountability and you have to have free access to information,” he said.
Dr Ampofo, who is also the former Member of Parliament for South Dayi, said though the passage of the RTI bill into law was in the domain of Parliament and the Executive, the policy could push for the speedy passage of the bill to add to records of numerous laws passed.
Dr Ampofo said oil block allocation was also critical and that the current law vested too much powers to the sector minister which did not promote competitive bidding and transparency.
He said the NDC’s position paper would seek to minimise such powers and open oil block allocation to open competitive bidding to raise more revenue and encourage judicious use of resources.
Four political parties - the National Democratic Congress, New Patriotic Party, Convention People’s Party and People’s National Convention - stated their policy positions on oil and gas last week at a joint forum.
The forum was facilitated by the Natural Resource Governance Institute and International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance to give political parties opportunity to articulate their new policy positions on oil and gas management.
The policy positions covered adoption of non-partisan approach to the appointment of board members, the need for legislation on contractual disclosure, the role of National Commission for Civic Education in educating the public on oil and gas legislations, and the role of the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation."	12	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"289"	2016-02-21	"The oil and gas policy developed by National Democratic Congress (NDC), seeking to boost transparency in the energy field, holds prospects to accelerate the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law, an expert says.
The ruling NDC with three other political parties last week stated their positions on the proper management of the country’s oil and gas resources to ensure transparency in the sector and derive optimum benefit towards improving living conditions of Ghanaians.
Dr Kwame Ampofo, Chairman of the Energy Commission, who described the policy as one of its kind, told the Ghana News Agency that the NDC’s policy position sought to bridge gaps in the country’s oil and gas resources management.
The policy paper, he noted, centred on improving information access to increase transparency and competitive bidding of oil blocks as well as stripping off the enormous powers vested in the energy minister for allocating and awarding oil blocks.
He said it has fused into the party’s policy document comprehensive standards and elements of verification, connecting oil and gas resources management to the RTI bill.
“I think additional elements are the issues of verification, the stakeholders must be able to verify what the administrators of the sector [oil and gas] are doing, so we are going to ensure that certain legislations [RTI] are passed to enhance the areas of monitoring, evaluation and establishment of accountability,” he said.
“For the oil and gas sector to be properly managed, you need to have transparency, you need to have accountability and you have to have free access to information,” he said.
Dr Ampofo said though the passage of the RTI bill has taken a relatively long period to be passed into law, it was in the domain of Parliament and the Executive, but the policy [oil and gas] could push for the speedy passage of the bill to add to records of numerous laws passed.
“We are now going to actively push the passage of that bill because we want it to be in existence, make it more accessible to the public and those who want to find information to make it easier,” he said.
He said this is the first time we are actually compiling such a document and linking it up with RTI to the management of the oil and gas sector.
“We are not going to guarantee that within the shortest possible time that it will be passed but we are saying that now it is part of the NDC policy that in connection with the management of the oil and gas sector we need to pass this bill,” Dr Ampofo.
He said with the RTI, having become a core part of a policy position, would facilitate the easy passage of the bill, stressing that “once we have this paper, it is going to push for the passage of the bill.”
Ghana’s RTI has been lingering between the Executive and Parliament over a decade drawing 25 professional bodies including Ghana Bar Association, Polytechnic Teachers Association and Ghana Medical Association in 2014 to issue a communique urging the Attorney-General and Parliament to pass the bill into law without delay."	12	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"290"	2015-11-10	"The nation is busy working out plans through parliament to pass the Right to Information Bill into law. This is a move whose result is likely to lift high the nation’s image. 
Honorable Alban Kingsford Bagbin, leader of parliament who believes in the RTI bill is leading the current parliament to consider amendments on the bill now before parliament which has been worked out with the help of the Coalition for the Right to Information. 
This bill is important to the people of Ghana who are hopeful that its passage will open up the nation for accountability and good governance to prevail. When the bill becomes law it would also give room for the government in tandem of the people to enforce the law as is happening in countries like Nigeria. One thing that the government would be expected to do is to sponsor the sensitization of the people to understand fully the contents of the RTI law. 
The bill when passed into law can also be translated into Ghanaian languages for the benefit of the majority of the people. For us to succeed in implementing the RTI law we ought to follow the best practices in some nations such as Nigeria.
According to news on-line received with the help of our roving consultant UGONNA IKWEGUE Nigeria has intensified moves to implement the Freedom of Information Law which was  passed recently  in that country. To this end, the Freedom of Information Unit of Nigeria’s Federal Ministry of Justice (FMOJ) in collaboration with the National Orientation Agency (NOA) has began implementing the Freedom of Information Act by public institutions in the country.
The Partnership agreement between the two organizations includes translation of the law into 28 languages and ways in which all the ministries and departments would implement the FOI law throughout Nigeria including how to disclose information.
3,000 personnel of the Agency have been deployed in continuous public sensitization about the act using the various platforms.
Top Nigerians feel that The FOI act is timely as the right to know is a fundamental right of every citizen and the Act could be used to fight the ills of the society and promote transparency and accountability. 
What is interesting about Nigeria is that besides moves to promote accountability and good governance through the FOI law the presidency under Mohammadu Buhari   is working hard to promote anti-corruption at the top level of governance through examples by the president himself.
The president has declared his assets and expects his ministers and governors to follow suit. He has caused the arrest of his brother in law who attempted to use him to dupe a businessman.  
President Buhari recently turned away a gift of truck load of sheep from a rich man meant for the Muslim festival of Eid Al Adha which coincides with the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca. On top of this entire president buhari has told the newly nominated ministers of Nigeria that his government would not tolerate ostentatious and flamboyant lifestyles from any one of them. 
The president served notice to the new ministers that some of them would not be assigned ministries while at the same time they would not be assigned large protocol officials at high cost to the nation.
President Buhari made it clear to the new ministers that in view of the dwindling fortunes of the nation the ministers in a single cabinet in an executive council would have to work together as a unit to safeguard the interest of Nigeria 
The examples set by Nigeria under President Buhari is good and worthy of emulation by all nations of Africa. President has proved that he as a military man has learnt to be a disciplined leader and expects all those working with him to follow his footsteps. 
The efforts to get the FOI law to work in Nigeria and the RTI to work in Ghana is good. The officials assigned to implement it must do their bit to complement what is being done by the leaders of the nations of Africa including Ghana and Nigeria.  
Executive Director
EANFOWORLD FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
P.O.BOX 17070AN    233244370345/23327483710/ 233208844791
abdulai.alhasan@gmail.com /eanfoworld@yahoo.com"	12	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"291"	2015-11-10	"Mr. Alban S.K. Bagbin, Majority Leader in Parliament, has said the Right to Information (RTI) Bill would be passed in the first quarter of next year.
He said huge amendment work has been done on the Bill and has been fine-tuned to enhance Ghana’s democracy.
The Majority Leader gave the assurance at a Constituency Forum at Nadowli on Saturday.
The RTI Bill, when passed into law, would provide a hierarchy of administrative avenues to ensure citizens get access to information and make the resort to the law courts for such information a last option.
Mr Bagbin attributed the delay in passing the Bill to lack of office accommodation for civil society organisations and other stakeholders, including Members of Parliament to work together.
Mr. Bagbin who is the incumbent Member of Parliament for Nadowli-Kaleo Constituency, gave the assurance that with the completion of the Job 600 facility for Members of Parliament to be used as offices, it would help fast track work on the RTI Bill."	12	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"292"	2015-10-01	"By Cletus D Kuunifaa
Let’s borrow a quotation from George Orwell’s famous novel, “Nineteen Eighty Four”, where he states, “There was of course no way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment…it was even conceivable that they watched everybody all the time.” 
This novel, as readers would attest to, was perpetuated through coercion and deception and the setting was in Britain as a ruse to emphasize that it was not an attack on communism and fascism alone, but a warning that totalitarianism, if not fought against, could triumph anywhere. 
Of course, Ghana is not a dystopia, but drawing on Orwell’s quotation, the intent for this piece is for us as a nation, to delve into the appropriate balance between liberty and security and privacy which have long been held contentious in political history.  
Matters have come to a head and legal brains and information policy experts must speak up on this case. Will the law hold Anas Aremeyaw Anas accountable for intruding lawfully or unlawfully on the privacy of individuals or will the judges be condemned for their enticed bribery culminating in their low morale, if proven guilty? 
My unfettered belief is that Justice Paul Uuter Dery’s case against Tiger Eye PI et al, will offer a clear , thoughtful and incisive analysis of the long standing tension between civil liberties on the one hand, and the security and privacy of citizens on the other hand.
Surely, while this case begins the legal and political debate over the proper balance between liberty and privacy and security, the revolution in technology and communication has even aggravated the discussion of privacy and security issues. 
ICT counted as advancement, has fueled this debate leaving a lot of work to information policy experts and legal luminaries to strike a reasonable balance between defending freedoms without sacrificing liberty. This case borders on the trade-off between privacy and security.  
But, on a more subtle note, this piece, as the title suggests, is not in defense of the judges, but rather intended to highlight on the need to pass the Right to Information (RTI) bill into law. The bill has languished for far too long on the shelf of parliament that it is only imperative now for it to become law with this case in focus. 
I have argued severally that passing the law is good policy to do so. It’s good politics to pass it. It’s good for our democracy. Since there already exist a constitutional right to information under article 21(1) f of the 1992 constitution, the passage of an RTI law would only operationalize the constitutional right to information under the said provision.
Yet, it’s sad that an individual right to privacy is not explicitly addressed under the provisions of both the constitution and the draft RTI bill, and journalists face a difficult balancing act. They have to respect privacy and they must also be rigorous and robust in their investigation into issues that are of public interest. It means that in some cases it will be necessary for a journalist to carry out an investigation that interferes with someone’s privacy. In cases such as crime and anti-social behavior and incompetence or neglect.
It’s equally instructive for journalists to note that the most important rule is that they must treat people fairly and with respect. They must also be clear about their own motives. They must have no personal interest in an investigation that invades a person’s privacy. The only justification is that it is in the public interest and they are genuinely trying to expose wrongdoing. 
The judges right to privacy versus the public’s right to know will stretch the history of constitutional law in Ghana. Am glad that this case will be tested in court and it would be interesting to see the established stares decisis, which is the doctrine of precedent and courts would cite to stares decisis, when an issue has been previously brought to the court and a ruling already issued. 
From a purely academic point of view, it would not surprise me if the pendulum in this case swings in favor of greater protection of personal privacy. 
Cletus D Kuunifaa 
TMC Group
Can be contacted at dipnibe@yahoo.com or Follow him on twitter @ckuunifaa"	12	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"293"	2015-08-28	"NPP MP K. T. \"Hybrid\" Hammond Wants $52B, Not $62B, for Ghana?(2)
By: Prof Lungu
Ghana, before that apology, Mr. K. T. \"Hybrid\" Hammond jabbed that Dr. Kunbuor's statement was \"...'...the most disgraceful statement that has ever been made by any member in (Parliament); it is insulting, it is foolish and should never be allowed...I ask for the statement to be withdrawn immediately…Mr. Speaker, I ask for the stupid and useless and foolish statement to be withdrawn immediately…it is palpable nonsense...'...But, it was Mr. K. T.  'Hybrid' Hammond who in the end was schooled about etiquette, responsibility, reflective pronouncements...\", ( K. T. \"Hybrid\" Hammond, as shadowed by Prof Lungu).  
Ghana, we know this:  It is a fact that even the Lawyer, the Adansi Asokwa NPP Member of Parliament, Mr. Kobina Tahir \"Hybrid\" Hammond, bright as he is, cannot show Ghanaians where in 1990-era P/NDC law a \"Ghana Hybrid System\" for collection of oil revenues owned to Ghana is codified as law. 
Further, as we said in Part 1 of this series, it would not be a surprise to many Ghanaians and Ghana supporters that Mr. \"Hybrid\" Hammond's tolerance for corruption, and his intolerance of the Freedom of Information (FOI) bill, seem unsurpassed by his own marks.
LAWYER K. T. \"HYBRID\" HAMMOND'S TOLERANCE FOR CORRUPTION SEEMS UNSURPASSED BY HIS OWN RECORDS:
You see, when we Googled Mr. H. T. Hammond of Ghana, the first and most noticeable item we found was an apology by Mr. Hammond to members of Ghana's Parliament on 7th December, 2013. 
As reported:
\"...Mr Hammond went ballistic when he rained insults on Majority Leader Dr. Ben Kunbuor who addressed the issue of corruption among politicians in the country...as the disease of the political elite...saying it had been confirmed by the 'drill ship and Woyome placards' on the floor of Parliament... However, K.T. Hammond was offended by the comparison with Woyome, saying that there was no corruption in the drill ship case...\"
Subsequently, Mr. Hammond, in the halls of the Ghana Parliament and on radio, used those \"...platform(s) to express...unqualified apology to the good people of Ghana...showing remorse about his conduct...(to the extent)...his outburst was...not of the “best behaviour”.
Imagine, before that apology, Mr. Hammond jabbed that Dr. Kunbuor's statement was \"... 'the most disgraceful statement that has ever been made by any member in (Parliament); it is insulting, it is foolish and should never be allowed...I ask for the statement to be withdrawn immediately…Mr. Speaker, I ask for the stupid and useless and foolish statement to be withdrawn immediately…it is palpable nonsense..” 
But, it was Mr. K. T.  \"Hybrid\" Hammond who in the end was schooled about etiquette, responsibility, reflective pronouncements. And we have not even to speak of constitutionality and Ghana-centeredness.
Kudos to Dr. Ben Kunbuor for responsible Ghana-centered actions!  
LAWYER K. T.  \"HYBRID\" HAMMOND HAS NO LOVE FOR FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL, EITHER 
Then there is the case just 2 days after the initial meeting with GIGS, on 9 July.  In that case, members of Ghana's Parliament were discussing the Freedom of Information (FOI) Bill (or as they weakly call it, the Right to Information (RTI bill). 
Apparently, if Mr. Hammond, now with the NPP minority has his way, the FOI bill will never see the light of day. According to the Record from Parliament, on that day in JUly, debate on the bill was not completed because among other reasons:
\"...Member of parliament Kobina Tahir Hammond...called the bill a minefield, cautioned: 'We must be very, very conscious as a nation, extremely conscious. There can be proper governance without a certain amount of secrecy...You don’t open up the entire gamut of government to the prying eye of the entire public'...\"
To that Hammond bewildering \"secrecy and conscious as a nation\" statement, MP and Minister for Science and Environment, Mr. Mahama Ayariga replied that \"...it is the time to pass an RTI law....'I think this country has been cautious enough. It is rather time for us to courageously move forward when it comes to the passage of the Right to Information Bill..(because)...'good governance...underpins our constitution...” 
So the other questions for Mr. Hammond are these: 
1.  What is Mr. Hammond afraid of?
2.  Why is it is a bad thing when \"the prying eye of the entire public\" is focused on items the public buys and pays for. You know, all the government contracts, benefits, taxes, liabilities accrued, equipment purchased, etc., by Parliament and Mr. Hammond, on behalf of the People of Ghana. 
Imagine!
Every month \"high\" public official Mr. Hammond receives more than  GH¢12,000.00 , all tax-free, with a catalog of free benefits (free housing, free staff, free transportation, per diem, etc), all tax-free. Mr. Hammond does not pay income tax on all his income and benefits. But it is the Ghanaian worker who lives in Akatechi, Kofevi, Navrongo, Cape Coast, Ho, Berekum, Cabo Corso, Ogwa, Kumasi, Tamale, Tema, Bongo, Karachi, Paga, Kukurantumi, Zvalungu, and all places in-between earning a whole lot less money, it is they who actually pay taxes to support Mr. Hammond, Mr. Dagadu, and a whole heap of them.
Yet, Mr. Hammond wants secrecy for oil contracts. Mr. Hammond has no love for access to information held by government by citizens. To boot, Mr. Hammond wants less money for Ghana, even though the PSA accrues more money for Ghana, in the medium- to long-term.  
ITEM: Our sincere thanks to Mr. Mahama Ayariga for standing up for swift passage of the FOI bill!   
So, we ask this simple question of Mr. Kobina T. \"Hybrid\" Hammond and the NDC Deputy Minister For Energy and Petroleum, Mr. Benjamin Dagadu:
QUESTION:   If Texas/USA, Malaysia, Kazakhstan, etc., can have the \"Gold-Standard\" Production Sharing Agreement (PSA) that will over the medium- to long-term pay Ghana billions more in oil revenues, why can't Ghana? 
Why resist the PSA mathematics and science?
Here is our bottom-line:  We believe that Mr. Hammond, Mr. Dagadu, and all those officials in Parliament who support them, or are otherwise silent, ought to sit up and do right by Ghana without further delays and loss of revenue to Ghana, today, tomorrow, and in the future. 
Oil, after all depletes! 
We are calling on all of them: Order!
Order!
Order! 
(Read our final installment, Part III, in this series on these same pages!).
NOTE: 
1.  Our thanks to Andy K for making information and data available to us at www.GHanaHero.com. 
SOURCES:
1.  Ghanaweb.  Feature Article, Petroleum bill a very bad deal for Ghana, 22 August 2015, Andy K / Solomon Kwawukume, Snr. Research Officer, GIGS.
2.  Ghanaweb.  I’m sorry – KT Hammond begs, 7 December, 2013, (www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/I-m-sorry-KT-Hammond-begs-294396).
3.  CitiFMOnline.  Don’t sack any Ghanaian technical staff, Petroleum Ministry warns Tullow, 18th March, 2015, (www.citifmonline.com/2015/03/18/dont-sack-any-ghanaian-technical-staff-petroleum-ministry-warns-tullow/#sthash.9ZM0JBg7.dpuf). 
See more and read more, at www.GhanaHero.com/Visions.
©GhanaHero.com is Ghana-centered/Ghana-Proud. 
We are more than talk. We are data-driven!  Prof Lungu is based in Washington DC, USA.  
Lawyer Kobina T. \"Hybrid\" Hammond Wants $52B, Not $62B, For Ghana-v2 ©28 Aug 15.
Brought to you courtesy www.GhanaHero.com."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"294"	2015-07-05	"The Parliamentary Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, has rejected a provision in the Right To Information Bill, that allows the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice to regulate access to information.
The committee wants the ministerial oversight responsibility reposed in an independent commission, which it argues will help ensure transparency and accountability in governance.
The Right To Information Bill has been in Parliament since 2010 and yet to be passed into law.
The house has began discussions on it once again.
Member of Parliament for Adansi Asokwa in the Ashanti Region, K.T. Hammond, urged the house to tread cautiously in passing the bill into law, adding it took decades for developed countries to establish the infrastructure and legal framework required for such laws.
He acknowledged the importance in the frontiers of government being opened up, but added that could also have serious national security threats.
\"A country democratic as it may be, can never be that open. Even the democracies like America and the US, has a space for certain documents to be kept away from the public\".
The Constitutional and Legal Committee which worked on the report kicked against the Minister of Justice as the regulator in accessing information and rather proposed that an independent committee takes charge but K.T Hammond disagreed with the committee.
NDC Member of Parliament for Bawku and Minister for Science and Environment, Mahama Ayariga, said Ghanaians have had to go through frustrations in accessing information and believed this was the time for the house to pass the bill into law.
\"This country has been cautious enough and it is time for us to courageously move forward when it comes to the pass sage of the right to information legislation and that is for two very reasons Mr. Speaker; One is the fact that to pursue good governance which underpins our constitution we need an open and transparent system and that is not in doubt. And I don't think that the pursuit of the establishment of an open and transparent system in anyway endangers the national security of any country\" he noted."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"295"	2015-07-01	" Parliament has initiated moves that seek to widen the scope of access to information to cover private bodies that perform public functions with state funds.
 A report of the Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Right to Information Bill, 2013, a copy of which is in the possession of Kasapafmonline.com, discusses that the bill in its current form is “too restrictive” and therefore, has proposed that coverage be extended to cover private bodies.
 “The Committee has observed that the Bill is applicable to only information held by government agencies. The Committee sees it to be too restrictive and therefore the coverage must be widened to cover private bodies that perform public functions with public funds.”
 “The Committee is of the view that the public should be able to have right of access to information in the custody of private bodies or agencies, especially, if the disclosure is in the public interest. It is a fact that in modern governance, non-state actors influence the destinies of millions of people and hence, the necessity to extend the coverage to private bodies.”
 To ensure fairness, the Committee has proposed that the term “government body” running through the Bill be substituted with the words “public institution” as done in other jurisdictions.
 “This is applicable to both South Africa and Liberia. In both jurisdictions, the right of access to information applies to private entities that receive public resources and benefits or engage in public functions or provides public services, particularly, in respect of information relating to the public resources, benefits or services,” Chairman of the Committee, Alban Sumana Kingsford Bagbin argued in his report that was recently submitted to the plenary for consideration and adoption."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"296"	2014-11-28	" The Western Regional Chapter of the Right to Information (RTI) Coalition on Wednesday renewed calls to Parliament to pass the Right to Information Bill into law to deepen the country’s democracy.
 It said parliament must pass the RTI Bill that would stand the test of time and meets international standards.
 Mr. Emmanuel Papa Assan, Focal Person of the Western Regional Chapter of the Coalition, made the call at a meeting of the chapter at Takoradi.
 He said some countries in the sub-region had passed their bills into law but Ghana, regarded as a leading democracy in Africa, had not done so.
 Mr. Assan said the RTI law was a constitutional provision and without it Ghana cannot call itself democratic.
 He said the law would promote transparency, accountability and enable people’s participation in governance while helping to minimize corruption and inefficiency in the public sector."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"297"	2014-11-16	" Twenty-five professional bodies including Ghana Bar Association, Polytechnic Teachers Association and Ghana Medical Association, have urged the Attorney-General and Parliament, to pass the Right to Information Bill into law without delay.
 The Attorney General and Minister for Justice should expedite the drafting of the relevant amendments to the Bill and ensure that the amendments faithfully capture the deliberations and decisions of the Select Committee, they said.
 “We call on Parliament, without further delay, to pass the Bill, with the relevant amendments into law and for the President to give his assent to the Bill,” the group said in a communiqué copied to the Ghana News Agency on Saturday.
 The communiqué, developed at a workshop on November 12, in Accra on the theme: “An Effective RTI Legislation, a Necessary Tool for development,” was organised by the Coalition on the RTI, Ghana.
 The Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs had made raft of proposals to the bill lingering over a decade, a move the Right to Information (RTI) Coalition endorsed.
 Some of the revisions included cutting short the long list of exemptions, which has now been subjected to a harm test, thereby banishing blanket exemptions from the Bill and further strengthening the proactive disclosure clause.
 It also reduced excessive timelines for granting access to information as well as inclusion of the establishment of an independent oversight Commission to oversee implementation of the Bill when passed, instead of the office of the Attorney General and Minister of Justice being responsible for implementation;
 The communiqué urged parliament and the public to support the proposals so that Ghana does not retrogress in the steps towards the passage of an information law that would help protect the integrity of public institutions, promote participation, transparency and accountability in public life.
 “We resolve to take various actions within the remit of the law to mobilise our constituent members and Ghanaians in general in support of an effective and robust right to information law as proposed by the Select Committee,” the group warned.
 It noted that the citizens’ right to information as guaranteed by the 1992 Constitution is a fundamental human right subject not to the inclinations and dictates of any individual or authority but to those limitations that are necessary in a democratic society as prescribed by law.
 The Ghana Right to Information Bill, 2010, which seeks to provide concrete legal mechanisms and procedures by which all persons could exercise and assert the right to access information in the custody of public institutions and categories of private bodies was resubmitted to Parliament on November 12, 2013.
 It was subsequently referred to the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny.
 The Select Committee, after series of consultations with civil society organisations and other stakeholders proposed revisions to the content of the Bill in line with the African Union Model Law and the Options Paper submitted to the Committee by the Coalition.
 The proposals were endorsed by Parliament and described by the coalition as a huge step towards the passage of a strong RTI Bill that would add to Ghana’s credentials of being one of the shining examples of democratic practice in Africa.
 The communiqué expressed the hope that any access to information law for Ghana should be consistent with the very clear provisions of Article 21(1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution.
 “A strong right to information legislation in Ghana will help to consolidate our democracy and build public confidence in our public institutions,” the communiqué added.
 Some of the groups that support the RTI are National Catholic Secretariat, Architects Registration Council, Ghana Institute of Architects, Ghana National Association of Small Scale Miners, Association of Building and Civil Engineers Contractors Ghana, All Africa Students Union and University Students Association of Ghana.
 Others include Ghana Union of Professional Students, Pharmaceutical Society of Ghana, Federation of Museum Council, Association of Ghana Industries, Lady Pharmacists Association of Ghana, Ghana Independent Broadcasters Association, Institute of Chartered Accountants and Institute of Public Relations Ghana.
 The rest are Ghana Institute of Planners, National Association of Graduate Teachers, Musicians Union of Ghana, Importers and Exporters Association, Private Newspapers Publishers Association of Ghana, Ghana Private Road Transport Union and National Union of Ghana Students."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"298"	2014-10-31	" Participants at a durbar of a case study on the Right To Information (RTI) in Koforidua, have called on members of the Coalition on the RTI, to focus their education on duty bearers, to enable them know their responsibility under the RTI Bill before it becomes Law.
 They also called for the education of media personnel, to be responsible in their reportage, to help reduce the possibility of abuse of the law when passed, to invade the privacy of people.
 This came to light at a durbar organized by the Eastern Regional Branch of the Coalition of the Right To Information to help demonstrate how the RTI law could be beneficial to ordinary citizens.
 The durbar was attended by heads of department, civil society organizations, assembly members, media personnel and ordinary citizens in Koforidua.
 The participants also called for the intensification of education on the bill to people outside the regional capitals and those in the rural areas for more and more people in the country to benefit from the bill when passed into law.
 Addressing the durbar, Mr Edmund Quaynor, Eastern Regional Coordinator of the Coalition on The Right To Information (RTI), explained that the people could effectively participate in the democratic development of the country, if they had access to information on issues around them.
 He said, this would enhance their ability to demand social accountability, check corruption and enhance fast development of the country.
 Mr Quaynor said, the result of the study indicate that, every member of the society can benefit from the implementation of the RTI,  if people know what to do at any time, and who to approach for  solutions to issues affecting the developments of their communities.
 He called on the participants to disabuse their minds that, the RTI law is only for the benefit of media personnel and researches.
 In the case study which was presented at the durbar, through a letter written by a citizen, complaining about a choked drainage that can cause flooding if not checked, the New Juaben Municipal Assembly was compelled to have the drainage cleared of the blockage."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"299"	2014-10-12	" The executive is a mere window dressing; government, a tool of oppression; cabinet an organ of lawlessness. The intersection of all these is hypocrisy. I think it is not only the EC that needs reforms. Parliament too needs some of it. A stronger parliament and stronger individuals who would be obliged to enforce the law with all alacrity and selflessness. The constitutional review process is ongoing. Both majority and minority have criticized the current parliamentary system. They call for proportional representation or the West Minster System. Yes, at least in their individual capacities in the winner-takes-all discussions, albeit with hypocrisy. Parliament is said to be in the belly of the executive and the latter wields too much power which often necessitates them to arrogate further absolute powers to themselves outside the bounds of legality. The functions and limits of cabinet are not (clearly) stated in the 1992 constitution of Ghana.
 What do we do to a clerk who refuses to submit allegations on government appointee designates? What do we do to Chairman of Appointments committee if he ignores or takes such letters less seriously?, what do we do a president who willfully violates his oath of office to issue such an appointment, the carelessness and “irregorousness’ of the appointments committee not withstanding? What do we do to a Speaker who uses his/her discretion to shred a petition requesting the investigation into a matter of national interest? I have often giggled at the right to work if ones documents are dropped at a time when every one else own are considered. How do you fight for your right without money? Will the Legal Aid Board give a person all the assistance one needs? How about other services outside the legal domain should government stretch the matter beyond proportion with state resources? What if a sitting president shoots a boy dead? What if government tarries in implementing the right to information bill. Can we drag our president to court just as congress threatened President Obama on his pro-poor healthcare policy? When sought to confront the truth they hide like tortoises.
 Mahama defied public outcry to install Spio, supervised illegal withdrawal from an Oil account, overstepped the bounds of the powers of cabinet to form his own committees; committing high treason therefrom, ordered voting without biometric registration. I wonder what will happen if he one day shoots a boy dead for he ever (nearly) triggered a weapon against JJ, his former boss.
 Overtly capricious. I think that is the term. This government is aggravating matters by creating a myriad of illegalities so that common sense may compromise the dignity of so called important people in society. People in leadership positions forget they belong to a sovereign nation and it is the people they serve. Knowledge of the latter seem to come to us during electioneering campaigns. After which we clinch to power, not to contribute our quota to the development of the nation but, to get our share of the national cake, indeed our chunk of the iceberg. Some have even vowed targets of wealth to acquire as if government business was private corporate competition.
 Much has been paid members of parliament so that the business community or interest groups could get their views articulated in parliament. This raised up a national issue sometime earlier and parliament was to take the matter on. That “lecturer and epileptic” promised he was prepared to avail himself for defense, after series of denials. This matter went down the drain. If not let’s wait to see what action the Speaker and parliament will take on the report concerning the investigation. I am not saying government should not seek expert opinion to enlighten government including parliament under particular circumstances, such as in genetic modified organisms, or an IT policy, before they can make rightful decisions. But where it amounts to parcels of token so that it may be lorded over the few ordinary people because of certain individual or group interests, it calls for concern.
 The Public Accounts committee has often criticized MMDAs on financial malfeasance but the recommendations therein have been mere routines of the Auditor General. I think some day it will cost the nation good for the Auditor General to leave the status quota and fold up his industry. The laid down structures have never worked. The President added his voice in a harmless directive. Variables won’t, constants aren’t.
 Because of this lackadaisical attitude of parliament people often snubbed the privileges committee of parliament with all its summoning power. 
 The code of conduct of members of parliament is yet to be implemented. I wonder whether it can make any significant meaning to their total workput. 
 Within government of its own caliber no one looks into the report of the transition team. The new government busies itself with the pomp and pageantry of the new investiture, where they talk big for the coming days.
 Many have cried they make the Attorney General’s office separate from the Ministry of Justice. In this prosecutions could be followed without executive incursion. But I think government rejected that recommendation of the constitutional review commission in its white paper. There must be control, they argued. Even including the RTI bill.
 Powers of president and oversight influence in state institutions would not be whittled down. Mills used to place a ceiling on what judgement debt the courts could give as if they have had no discretion. I don’t know the position of Mahama. Even that there is much negotiation beyond the court order, at the AG office at what figures needs to be reconfigured according to their discretion. Where beneficiaries are party loyalists, the amount is inflated with expectation of plough back profit. When s/he belongs to the opposition it is whittled down to peanut. Cabinet may sit on it or the president may use his veto.
 EOCO with all its refurbishment, is it refurbishment, budgetary doll out is still being described as a hide out for serious fraud. When it becomes a national issue the government snatches it from them to form a committee of enquiry as if is not equipped enough to tackle important issues. If this is beyond its mandate fine, but sometimes it is just choice based on executive influence. If not I know EOCO like CHRAJ can end its proceedings in a court of law.
 Is it this CHRAJ or EOCO that has a rent mangana that the nation is paying dearly for, and over 90% of its employees, not just from the same tribe but the same village. It is the Head office am referring to.
 The reorientations and overlapping roles EOCO/CID/BNI/ NATIONAL SECURITY as well as CHRAJ calls for serious concerns. The least mistake you are laid off, deemed not sharing a vision with them. Nobody asks for explanation. We remain swollen tongued.
 Mahama has arrogated to himself powers to dabble in the tomfoolery of his predecessor that may someday languish him in sheol. Look the Constitutional Review Commission is going its way while parliament is silent, really speaking at the sidelines, so to speak, while nothing is being done about the winner-takes-all system. Much information has been given, however. My concern is not to take a position but to condemn the hypocrisy in no uncertain terms since nothing is been practically done. 
 And look! African governments have threatened withdrawal from the Rome Statue which established the International Criminal Court to do prosecutions where member states have been unable or unwilling to do them. They have instead suggested an African Union Court, which will exempt presidents and ministers of Africa from prosecutions while they hold offices. Will this same institution (or constitution) provide for their step down to aid investigations. While I have not been following the story thoroughly this is the aspect that will reduce the Arusha-based court to ground zero. This will enable them to carry on their nefarious activities to sustain them in government at all cost, with impunity of course, only to be spared or granted amnesty by their governments when they step down. Africa’s corruption and oppression will now have a fertile ground to thrive. I am not against an African Court to settle African matters, even the ICC as it stands has greater African Presence: the Chief Prosecutor, former President of the court and other notable members are Africans. Its potency on non-Africans is by all means a waterloo to be addressed. But if an African Court can work well we don’t need to waste resources elsewhere.
 I hope the Moh Ibrahim award would not shortlist John Mahama otherwise there will be demonstrations and chaos in the streets of Accra as corruption is one of the hall marks of this regime. Even though Ghana tops 7th on the index, he can no where be a recipient were he to step down or complete his tenure. 
 Ghana’s media itself is very corrupt, topping Africa and probably world rankings. They broadcast or publish what suits them but bag what they deem unpalatable awaiting a future time. So much of the criteria that will reduce Ghana from its consistent position has been shielded. Our position on the anti-corruption index by Transparency International has not been any better over the years. They are not saints or angels, but where there is outright connivance in corruption deals with the business magnates in dubious judgement debts and contract sums and among government functionaries themselves, must we keep quiet because we want our leader to earn the million dollar award? By no means!
 This piece is but a harbinger. We watch out for a day when they will truly emerge and what excuse they will have to give for the blatant violations, indiscretions, abuse of power, and causing of financial loss to the state and the gains thereof, if any.
 The courts are not behaving like anyone else, the least said about them the better. They seem inviolate and next to God. Should this third organ of government mess up we are doomed. Even though they receive their share of criticisms I pray these “legal men” to remain resolute in their high moral standing to serve society in the rightful way."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"300"	2014-09-02	" The Africa office of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) has partnered with Simli Radio to educate communities on human rights issues as well as empower them to challenge their Members of Parliament (MPs) to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law.
 The partnership would see Simli Radio, a community radio station based at Dalun in the Kumbungu District, to organize community forums and visit market centers and other social gatherings including using radio to educate residents on the RTI and other constitutional rights.
 The project, which targets communities at Savelugu/Nanton Municipality, Tolon and Kumbungu districts, also aims at empowering residents to demand information and accountability from duty bearers including assembly members.
 Mad Mina Mensah, the Regional Coordinator of the Africa Office of CHRI, who spoke about the project at a debriefing forum at Dalun on Monday for some of the staff of Simli Radiowho had been trained on basic human rights issues and the RTI, said there was the need for public disclosure of information for development.
 Madam Mensah said ensuring access to information by citizens would enable them to demand accountability from duty bearers, which was an important component of democratic governance.
 She said access to information by citizens would also ensure an informed society and urged the citizenry to demand accountability and information from duty bearers.
 “We must not be apathetic when the information is not given but rather press on to seek the information,” mad Mensah said.
 She said the posture of some MPs towards passing the RTI Bill into law was regrettable and called on authorities to show more commitment to passing the bill.
 The RTI Bill has been under consideration by Parliament for several years now and its advocates say if it is passed in its current state, it will rather worsen access to information by the citizenry.
 Mr Abukari Abdul Razak, Producer at Simli Radio, said the training received by some staff of Simli Radio on basic human rights and RTI would be brought to bear on the project to ensure success.
 Chief of Moglaa, Iddrisu Andani, who chaired the forum, urged government to ensure that the bill was passed in a workable manner that would benefit all."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"301"	2014-08-27	" Representatives of community radio stations have said they are frustrated that the Right To Information Bill (RTI) has not been passed into law after more than 10 years of its formulation.
 They said the ‘swinging’ of the Bill between the Legislature and the Executive  over the period had made access to critical information the preserve of the elite and powerful politicians.
 Members of the Ghana Community Radio Network expressed their concerns in a five-point communiqué issued at the close of a two-week training session in Accra.
 “The delay in amending and passing into law, a Bill that has the potential to transform the everyday lives of ordinary people is a betrayal of public trust in the institution of Parliament and a failure on the part of Parliament to secure the interest of their constituents,” the communique said.
 They, therefore, called on Parliament and the Executive to muster the political will and pass the bill without any further delay.
 The representatives from the Central, Upper West, Northern, Brong Ahafo and Upper East regions  participated in the training session, organised by the Africa Office of the Common Wealth Human Rights Initiative.
 The broadcasters received updates on legal issues, principally, Section 16 (1) of the Local Government Act of 1993 (Act 462), to empower them to promote citizens’ right to information and participation in local governance.
 The law requires that, a member of a District Assembly maintains close contact with, and consult the people of an electoral area, on issues to be discussed in the District Assembly and collate their views, opinions and proposals towards the formulation of policies and projects for their well-being.
 Members of the Network said after participating in the two-week internship training on the right to access information, they were sufficiently informed and equipped to broadcast their knowledge and to build a constituency committed to seek information from duty-bearers.
 “We have realized the urgent need not just to push for the passage of a good RTI Bill into law in the country, but also to inculcate in the people, especially at the grassroots levels, the habit of holding leaders, particularly, assembly members accountable by seeking information on issues of concern,” the communiqué said.
 The communiqué said efforts to have an effective RTI Bill passed into law to facilitate the constitutional right to information should be seen as a collective effort by the public.
 “We therefore wish to remind our MPs that in 2010 during the MPs regional consultations on the Bill, Ghanaians articulated the need for amendments.
 The RTI Coalition has been actively campaigning for the RTI bill to be passed into law.
 The Coalition is, however, pushing  for a review of sections of the Bill, which it considers problematic, especially with regard to the timelines for responding to requests for information."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"302"	2014-08-24	" Representatives of five community radio stations of the Ghana Community Radio Network (GCRN) are calling for an urgent passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill in the country into law.
 According to the group, the constitutional right to information points out provisions to existing laws that promote access to information such as section 16 of the Local Government Act 462.
 This was contained in a statement signed by representatives of all five community radio stations of the GCRN namely; Radio Breezy of Ajumako-Bisease, Central region, Radio Gurune of Bolgatanga, Upper East region, Radio Progress of Wa, Upper West Region, Radio FM of Wenchi, Brong Ahafo region and Radio Simli of Dalun, Northern region
 According to the release, the decision was made after the group participated in a two-weeks internship training on the right to access information from 4th-15th of August, 2014 organized by the Africa office of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI).
 It noted  “efforts to have an effective RTI Bill into law to facilitate the constitutional right to information should not be seen as the preserve of the elite in society but rather a collective effort from the general public.”
 The group also noted that even though this move comes with enormous benefits, it is surprising to know that leaders have refused to expedite action on the Bill to meet international standards and best practices.
 “The delay in amending and passing into law, a Bill that has the potential to transform the everyday lives of ordinary people is a betrayal of public trust in the institution of parliament and a failure of parliament to secure the interest of constituents” the statement said.
 In view of this, the group has, therefore, called on the leaders of the country especially parliamentarians to have the Bill amended and enacted into law immediately."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"303"	2014-08-22	"Representatives of five community radio stations of the Ghana Community Radio Network (GCRN) are calling for an urgent passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill in the country into law.
According to the group, the constitutional right to information points out provisions to existing laws that promotes access to information such as section 16 of the Local Government Act 462.
This was contained in a statement signed by representatives of all five community radio stations of the GCRN namely; Radio Breezy of Ajumako-Bisease, Central region, Radio Gurune of Bolgatanga, Upper East region, Radio Progress of Wa, Upper Westg region, Radio FM of Wenchi, Brong Ahafo region and Radio Simli of Dalun, Northern region
According to the release, the decision was made after the group participated in a two-weeks internship training on the right to access information from 4th-15th of August, 2014 organized by the Africa office of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI).
It noted that “efforts to have an effective RTI Bill into law to facilitate the constitutional right to information should not be seen as the preserve of the elite in society but rather a collective effort from the general public.”
The group also noted that even though this move comes with enormous benefits, it is surprising to know that leaders have refused to expedite action on the Bill to meet international standards and best practices.
“The delay in amending and passing into law, a Bill that has the potential to transform the everyday lives of ordinary people is a betrayal of public trust in the institution of parliament and a failure of parliament to secure the interest of constituents” the statement said.
In view of this, the group has therefore called on the leaders of the country especially parliamentarians to have the Bill amended and enacted into law immediately."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"304"	2014-07-07	" One particular piece of legislation whose passage by Parliament has unduly delayed is the Right to Information Bill. It is a bill which transcended both former President John Kufour and President Atta Mills governments, and till date it still lingers on in Parliament.
 Last week, a new development came up, And that was the claim that Ghanaians do not want a Right to Information (RTI) Law, a belief which has been debunked by the RTI Coalition, Ghana. See our front-page story bannered Ghanaians don't want Right to Information law, say Speaker, Information Minister & others; but RTI Coalition disagrees.
 According to the story, Ghana's Speaker of Parliament, the former Minister for Information and Media Relations, and some members of the Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have stated that majority of Ghanaians are not interested in having a RTI law. However, this assertion has been debunked by the RTI Coalition, Ghana, and rightfully so.
 It is ironical that a law that holds so much for the country in terms of information flow and development has not been accorded the expected priority which many Ghanaians associate with it.
 But as pointed out by Ms Pansy Tlakula, South Africa's Electoral Commission Chairperson, in an interview with the Ghana News Agency (GNA), Ghana's image will be enhanced as the shining star of Africa's democracy, should we pass the RTI Bill.
 She said government is the custodian of information on behalf of the people, and access to information will promote good governance, transparency and accountability.
 Ms Tlakula, who is also the African Union Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, urged the Executive, Parliament and CSOs, to work hand-in-hand to ensure the smooth passage of the Bill.
 She said such a law should be implemented by an independent arbiter to ensure that the citizenry's right to information is protected.
 Research reveals that 13 African countries, including South Africa, Uganda, Ethiopia, Tunisia, Rwanda, Zimbabwe, Nigeria, Liberia, Niger, Guinea, Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire, have RTI laws.
 We of Public Agenda are of the view that Ghana will lose out in the democratic league competition if we fail to get through this significant law. Ms Tlakula has hit the nail on the head, and we better wake up as a country and get our acts right and ensure that the passage of the Bill.  A word to a wise, they say, is enough."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"305"	2014-07-07	" Ghana's Speaker of Parliament, Rt. Hon. Edward Doe Adjaho, the former Minister for Information and Media Relations, Hon. Mahama Ayariga, and some members of the Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have stated that majority of Ghanaians are not interested in having a law on the Right to Information (RTI).
 But the RTI Coalition, Ghana has debunked their stance, saying that an RTI Act would benefit all Ghanaians, including the Executive and Legislature. Rt Hon. Adjaho, Hon. Ayariga and the Parliamentary Committee members made various statements to the effect that ordinary Ghanaians were not clamouring for the RTI Bill to be passed because it was not their priority when members of the RTI Coalition accompanied the African Union (AU) Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, Ms Pansy Tlakula, to visit them in Accra last week.
 At an interactive session in Accra last Wednesday between Ms Tlakula, and a representative of the Peoples National Convention (PNC), some civil society organisations (CSOs) and the media, the AU Rapporteur and some members of the RTI Coalition revealed that during their meetings with the Speaker, the Minister and the Committee members, their refrain was: “The people don't want the RTI law.”
 Addressing stakeholders at the session, Ms Tlakula made it clear that a “Freedom of Information law is for everyone, and not for journalists alone.” She stated that she and members of the RTI Coalition were able to get commitments from the Speaker and members of Parliamentary Committee that the RTI Bill would be passed before the expiration of the current term of Parliament in 2016.
 “There is a commitment to pass the Bill in this term. And also there are contentious issues to be resolved,” she said. She said access to information promotes accountability and transparency, adding that the real work of ensuring effective implementation of the RTI law lay with the Coalition. She said 13 African countries have laws on freedom of information (FOI).
 Giving the current status of the RTI Bill, Ms Mina Mensah, Co-ordinator of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative Africa Office, said the Coalition met the Parliamentary Committee recently and the Coalition was informed that the Bill had been sent to the Attorney-General's Department for further amendments that would incorporate its proposals. Ms Mensah was glad that the Committee was amenable to the suggestions of the Coalition. She was hopeful that the AU Model Law on Freedom of Information presented to members of the Committee and the Executive would be taken in consideration when the RTI Bill was passed.
 Presenting the experience of South Africa on the implementation of its FOI law, Professor Frans Viljoen of the Centre for Human Rights of University of Pretoria said that country was the first to have the law but its implementation faced several challenges. The challenges, Prof. Viljoen said, included the non-designation of information officers; low level of awareness by the governmental departments; and lack of up-to-date record-keeping. Initiatives being taken, he noted, were preparation and dissemination of training manuals; holding of trainers' workshops; law clinics; and the institution of the Golden Key awards for entities.
 Sharing lessons Nigeria learnt in the implementation of its FOI law, Mr Maxwell Kadiri, a lawyer and free expression consultant, urged the Coalition to soldier on with the advocacy campaign for the RTI Bill to be passed despite being at it for about 10 years. Mr Kadiri said civil society activists took 18 years to get the Nigerian government to pass the law. He revealed that the FOI law was now beneficial to the politicians who initially opposed its passage.
 “FIO law is also beneficial to political parties and the PDP [Peoples Democratic Party] boast of FOI as one of its achievements. Six countries in West Africa have FOI laws. Ghana cannot be seen to be rolling back the tide. Ghana must have a law that is robust and progressive,” he declared."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"306"	2014-07-03	" Economic Development Report in Africa says African governments should have coherent approach to trade negotiations and agreement, to ensure the outcomes are mutually supportive of economic transformation and development.
 The report which was launched in Accra on Thursday by Third World Network on behalf of the United Nations Trade and Development (UNTAD), noted that African countries could also boost investment through fostering international trade.
 On the theme, “Catalysing Investment for Transformative Growth in Africa,” the report looked at the key determinants of investment in Africa; similarities and differences in the composition and characteristics of investment across African countries; and how productive investment had been over the past two decades.
 It also considered how investment could be directed to strategic sectors of African economies, to ensure that growth was accompanied by diversification and structural transformation; how to strengthen linkages between investment by local and foreign firms, and what policy measures were needed to catalyze investment for transformation.
 The report underscored the need for the international community to grant African countries more market access, particularly in areas such as Agriculture, where they had a comparative advantage.
 It, however, said enhanced market access would be of benefit to African countries only if they had the productive capacity to take advantage of the opportunities arising from such market access, and stressed the need to build productive capacities in Africa and also for better information-sharing on available market access opportunities for Entrepreneurs to take advantage of.
 “Access to a larger market through trade will allow African countries to exploit economies of scales, associated with producing for a larger market, thereby enhancing their competitiveness and stimulating investment,” it added.
 It said high international trade costs had a negative impact on trade and investment in Africa and recommends that the international community provided financial and technical support to African countries to enable them implement the agreement on trade facilitation adopted by the World Trade Organization in Bali in December, 2013.
 On using aid to stimulate investment, the Report underscored the need for more aid to be channeled to the productive sectors to build capacities on the continent.
 It further argued that aid could have a more positive impact on development in Africa, if it was geared towards stimulating through using it as a guarantee mechanism to reduce the risks faced by lenders and investors.
 It, therefore, encouraged development partners to use more aid to lift infrastructure constraints, particularly in energy and transport, as was recently done by the United States through the Power Africa Initiative.
 In strengthening linkages between local and foreign enterprises, the Report noted that although African counties experienced a significance increase in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) flows to the continent over the past decades, there were concerns that the developmental impact had been limited due in part to weak linkages between foreign and local enterprises.
 It argued that inadequate infrastructure and skilled labour, low absorptive capacity, policy incoherence, and the lack of a vibrant domestic private sector were some factors responsible for the weak linkages between local and foreign enterprises in Africa.
 The report, therefore, recommended that African governments should create and strengthen linkages through developing and improving workforce skills, as well as raise the absorptive capacity of local firms through the imposition of technology transfer requirements on FDI.
 It also stressed on the need to promote joint ventures between local and foreign enterprises and to make FDI policy consistent with the promotion of domestic entrepreneurship and not to promote FDI in a manner that discriminated against local investors.
 “Furthermore, if incentives are to be used to promote FDI, they should be used mainly for attracting new investments in activities where a country cannot attract investors without such incentives,” the report suggested."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"307"	2014-06-30	" The African Union (AU) Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, Ms Pansy Tlakula is to pay a three-day working visit to Ghana to interact with governmental officials, civil society activists, politicians and media practitioners on Ghana’s Right to Information Bill.
 The AU Special Rapporteur will meet with Leadership of Parliament; Minister of Information and Media Relations; Minister of Gender, Children and Social Protection; AU Special Rapporteur; and the Select Committee on Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.
 The Ghana Coalition on Right to Information who is hosting the Special Rapporteur in a statement to the Ghana News Agency in Accra on Tuesday explained that Ms Tlakula’s visit is to find out about the state of the RTI Bill.
 In Ghana though the RTI Bill has been in existence since 2002, it has still not been passed into law.
 The Coalition is convinced that it is a necessary pillar for the exercise of democratic governance, the RTI law should be a matter of priority for the Government.
 The Coalition since its establishment in 2003, has undertaken several projects to raise awareness on the right to information and campaign for greater transparency.
 The objective of its activities is to bring together a diverse network of civil society actors, policy makers, and government workers in an effort to firmly place RTI on the national agenda, and to sensitise the public, as the primary beneficiaries of the law, on the importance of the successful passage of the RTI law in Ghana.
 The Coalition recognises that its effort at lobbying the Government and campaign the society at large is a strong task that needs the input of civil society as a whole.
 It, therefore, welcomes all interested stakeholders to join the Coalition in this mission to make the right to information a living reality for the people of Ghana.
 Meanwhile, the profile of Ms Tlakula obtained by the Ghana News Agency in Accra indicates that she is the current Chairperson of the Electoral Commission of South Africa.
 She holds an LLB degree from the University of the Witwatersrand, an LLM degree from Harvard University, and an honorary doctorate in legal studies from the Vaal University of Technology.
 She is an admitted advocate of the High Court of South Africa.
 She joined the South African Electoral Commission in February 2002 as Chief Electoral Officer and served in this position until her appointment as Chairperson of the Commission.
 Before that, she was a member of the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) for six years. During her period in office, she served as the co-convenor of the first National Conference on Racism.
 She represented the SAHRC at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. She is also the former National Director of the Black Lawyers Association.
 She served as the Chairperson of the Council of the University of the North-West from 1997 to 2003. She was also Chairperson of the board of the National Credit Regulator.
 She is the Chancellor of the Vaal University of Technology and also serves on the Board of the Bidvest Group Ltd.
 In July 2005, she was appointed as a member of the African Commission for Human and Peoples’ Rights. Her portfolio in the Commission is the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression and Access to Information in Africa, and she is also responsible for the Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Swaziland, South Sudan and Sierra Leone.
 Ms Tlakula has received a number of awards including the Rapport / City Press Prestige Woman in 2006 and the 2007 CEO Magazine Most Influential Woman award in the category of Government and related institutions and the Black Business Executive Circle Chairman's award in 2011."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"308"	2014-06-28	" Providing information in a timely manner on government activities can expose corruption at its birthing stages and ensure that the path of the looted money is traced, says Right To Information (RTI) Coalition.
 It said information should be made available at a time when it is relevant and can be utilised to resolve issues of national interest.
 A statement the coalition issued in Accra and copied to Ghana news agency over the weekend, observed that information on government activities retrieved at the earliest possible time is capable of exposing corruption.
 It noted that with the emergence of social media platforms like facebook and twitter churning out information in a matter of seconds, the timeliness of information disclosure in public institutions is critical.
 Timely disclosure of information is fundamental to the efficacy of any right to Information legislation.
 However, the Ghana Right to Information Bill currently before parliament is very weak in this direction and could take more than half a year in certain situations before a request for information is granted, the coalition said.
 Ghana’s RTI Bill requires 21 working days before a request is considered and 14 days to determine whether or not the information will be given. Another 14 days is required for the information requested to be produced.
 There is 21 working days possible extension if the application involves large quantities of information and a three Month (90 days) possible period of extension at the Minister’s discretion.
 It also takes 30 days within which to notify the applicant in writing of the period of extension while 21 working days is required to file an application for review and 21 working days to notify the applicant of the Minister’s decision on review.
 The bill further requires 21 working days to lodge an application for judicial review at the Supreme Court and when the request is to be transferred to another institution, the Bill provides for 10 working days within which to make the transfer.
 When a request is to be transferred to another institution, the Bill provides for 10 working days within which a transfer is to be made.
 The RTI coalition described the timelines as stated in the Bill as “excessive and undermines the right to information”.
 It questioned whether it is necessary for one to wait for 14 days when an application relates to information, which reasonably appears to be necessary to safeguard the life or liberty of a person.
 It said 21 working days to merely consider a request and determine whether or not information would be given is manifestly too long while the Sector Minister’s discretion to extend the timeframe to a further three months is absolutely unnecessary and might lead to the abuse of power by the Minister.
 “Unduly long timelines may discourage applicants from applying for a review of their request for information, or worst still applicants may be discouraged from requesting for information at all; Long timelines may also render the information useless or irrelevant when obtained,” the coalition said.
 The Coalition therefore proposes the Bill be amended to include 48 hours to consider request and determine whether or not information will be given.
 It also suggests 14 days needed to give information to the applicant and another 14 days extension to be shortened to 48 hours.
 However, in Nigeria, Article 4(a) of the Freedom of Information Act, 2011 provides that when an application is made, the public institution to which the application is made shall within seven days after the application is received make the information available to the applicant.
 It also states that when a transfer of the request is to be made to another institution, the public institution may make the transfer within three days but not later than seven days. Extension of the time stipulated shall not exceed seven days.
 In Sierra Leone, the Right to Access Information Act, 2013, provides that a request for information shall receive a response within 15 working days of receipt of the application.
 When an application is especially complex or relates to a large volume of information, an extension of time may be made for not more than 15 working days. When a transfer is to be made under Article 5(1) of the Act, the application may be transferred not later than three days from the date of receipt of the application.
 Liberia, Chapter three, Section 3.9 of the Freedom of Information Act, 2010 provides that every public authority and private entity shall respond to every request for information within 30 calendar days.
 The 30 calendar days shall be extended once but upon showing of a reasonable cause. In case of a transfer, it shall be made no later than 15 days after receipt of the request."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"309"	2014-05-28	" Mr. Yusupha Crookes, World Bank Country Director has called for the Passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill, which is stalled in Parliament,  to demonstrate Government’s commitment to open governance.
 He said the bill, when passed, would afford the citizens better access to fiscal, monetary and financial information and enhance independent policy analysis and the ability of citizens to monitor the cycle of public policies.
 Mr. Crookes stated these on Wednesday during the opening of a one-day workshop dubbed “Improving Accountability and Public Policy Outcomes through Independent Budget Monitoring,” organised by the World Bank in Accra.
 The World Bank Country Director added that the passage of the Right to Information Bill would also lead to enhanced accountability, improved government effectiveness and better fiscal outcomes whilst contributing to inclusive economic growth.
 He said over the past two decades, Ghana’s performance on democratic governance had continued to be impressive, arising from a number of factors, including strong multiparty system, growing media pluralism and strong voice from civil societies.
 He noted that recent implementation of the Ghana Integrated Financial Information Management System (GIFMIS), would not only improve and strengthen budgeting and accounting, but would also serve as signs of effective development.
 He said as part of the World Bank’s support towards improving economic institutions, the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the next three years would focus on strengthening budget institutions and public financial management systems to enable them to deliver on their mandate.
 Mr. Crookes said the purpose of the workshop was to present the results of several reports produced by the Public Interest and Accountability Committee and civil society organisations on the monitoring of the budget and examining the results of public spending.
 Dr. Sulley Gariba, Senior Policy Coordinator, Office of the President, noted that 50 per cent of the nation’s tax revenue goes into the payment of wages and urged all Ghanaians to continue to be productive.
 He said as part of Government’s commitment towards infrastructural development, a huge chunk of the nation’s investment was put into developmental projects such the construction of roads and electricity.
 Mr Bishop Akologo, Executive Director, ISODEC, called on Government agencies to ensure that all their financial plans were in total consonance with their respective ministries before seeking approval from Parliament.
 He called on Ghanaians to be more concerned about the long-term plans that politicians had for Ghana and not the short term ones, which most of the time only favoured the political agenda of the party in power."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"310"	2014-04-04	" The Right To Information Coalition is appealing to the public for support in its quest to ensure a review of the current RTI Bill before parliament.
 The group has started a process of highlighting some major concerns on the bill as part of measures to mobilise mass action against the passage of the current bill.
 It argues that the provisions in the current bill if passed will not only curtail complete access to information but also make a mockery of Ghana’s democratic credentials. Below is a write up on one out of about eleven areas of concern the group has on the RTI Bill.INTRODUCTION
 Information generally serves to enlighten public participation, build popular confidence and promote democratic empowerment. Access to information facilitates people’s participation in public affairs. Implicit in the notion of access to information is people’s right to know what government is doing with the tax payers’ money and what government plans to do in their name and on their behalf. In Africa and beyond, the right to access information has gained wide recognition as an indispensable feature of a functional democracy. The 1992 Constitution of Ghana guarantees to everyone, under article 21(1) (f), the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.
 In 2003, the government of Ghana prepared the first draft Right to Information (RTI) Bill to give effect to the constitutionally guaranteed fundamental right to information. Following some degree of consultations with civil society, the bill was finally laid before the 5th Parliament on Friday, February 5, 2010. While the Coalition on the Right to Information, Ghana recognises that the provisions of the Bill are a fair attempt to meet international human rights standards and best practice, there are still eleven (11) areas that are in critical need of review in order to bring the Bill in line with international standards on RTI legislation.BEST PRACTICE ON THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION LEGISLATION
 Based on International standards and best practices on RTI, the African Union (AU) has developed a model law which captures and sums up the best practices on RTI legislation. This first article introduces the fundamental principle upon which a strong RTI legislation is crafted.1. Maximum Disclosure :
 Maximum disclosure is the overriding principle of any effective right to information law; however, the Ghana RTI Bill is still weak on this point:
 There is a presumption that all the information held by public bodies can be accessed by members of the public and that any restrictions should only apply in very limited circumstances.  Every person, citizen and non-citizen of Ghana, has a human right to request and receive information; the government has an obligation to disclose requested information.
 The government has a responsibility to proactively publish and disseminate key documentsWHAT THE BILL PROVIDES:
 The current RTI Bill provides the following on the government’s obligation to disclose:
 - Right to access official information see clause 1;
 - Responsibility of government to provide information on governance see clause 2;
 Proactive disclosure: the government’s obligation to make information accessible without anybody requesting for the information;
 Responsibility of minister in respect of access see clause 3.
 Government agencies are to compile and publish information in an annual manual.PROBLEMS:
 The preamble to the Bill falls short of emphasizing the principle of maximum disclosure. Maximum disclosure is further undermined in the Bill by the following which will be analysed in subsequent editions
 Numerous exemptions from clauses 5 -17, some of which are loosely worded and unnecessarily repeated without being adequately subjected to the harms test.
 Unduly long timelines for disclosure
 Cumbersome and rather expensive fee regime
 Inaccessible review/appeals mechanism
 Lack of coverage of private bodies.SUGGESTIONS:
 1. Maximum disclosure should be upheld throughout the Bill.
 2. There should be a requirement for the manuals produced by government agencies to include their policies and reasons for adopting them. This will facilitate the peoples’ right to know government dealings as the basic requirement for a right to information law"	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"311"	2014-03-05	"“Tweaa” Parliament Must Pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill
By Cletus D Kuunifaa
James Madison once pontificated: “A popular Government, without popular information, or the means of acquiring it, is but a Prologue to a Farce or a Tragedy, or, perhaps both” (1822). Whether this aphorism has measured up to expectation and stood the test of democracy in Ghana remains to be investigated. 
But one sure thing is that the right to information is a fundamental human right and must not be toyed with by our clueless legislators. Parliament ought to have known better that good laws, good policies translate into good politics. And from all indications, Ghanaians are disappointed at their inability to pass the bill into law as yet. 
Why should parliament be cajoling with our fundamental human rights? Don’t they get it that a good Right to Information law, it is argued, would enhance the capacity of government to develop and meet citizen’s demands for transparency, accountability, and good governance? Yet, are these positive gains elusive for Ghana as supporters of the bill continue to rally under rights coalition groups of civil societies, pressure groups, and nongovernmental organizations to press for action and keep pressure on you (Parliament) to pass the bill into law?  
How much education and/or advocacy do you “tweaa” parliamentarians still need to pass this bill into law? Are you (Parliamentarians) even cognizant of the fact that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is generally considered to be the flagship statement of international human rights, binding on all states as a matter of customary international law?  Article 19 of the UDHR guarantees not only the right to freedom of speech, but also the right to information, in the following terms: “Everyone has the right to freedom of expression: this right includes the right to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers” (http://www.ohchr.org/EN/UDHR/Pages/Introduction.aspx). 
And the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which Ghana ratified in September 2000, guarantees the right to information in similar terms, providing: “Every one shall have the right to freedom of expression: this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print.” (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICCPR). The Economic Community of West African States (Ecowas) and the African Union (AU) have similar provisions guaranteeing our right to information.
While these international and constitutional obligations are binding on governments to adopt and implement for the benefit of their citizens, it is unclear if these international and constitutional obligations are being adhered to in Ghana. Even if, our parliamentarians are clueless regarding this, how clueless could they have become to ignore such a pertinent issue of Right to Information (RTI) which first reared its head in the Ghanaian public discourse since in1999? Are they not aware that by 2003, the government had already drafted the first RTI bill to operationalize the constitutional right to information under article 21(1) f of the 1992 constitution which states, “All persons shall have the right to information, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society?”  
This provision would suggest that Ghana has accepted, as a constitutional matter, the right to information enshrined in the above international texts, and to all intent and purposes, the bill, when passed, aims to consolidate the rights of journalists and the public to access information from government officials and public institutions without hindrance. 
The Right to Information law in some countries has been tried and tested regarding the creation and distribution of information. Ghana is yet to follow the examples of these countries and experience the potential benefits that come along with its passage. Should the Right to Information Law be passed, it would surely help meet the information needs of the people so that citizens can be fully and properly informed of how the business of government is being run and make useful contributions for effective development. So, why Parliament is delaying on this crucial matter?  The passage of this bill is rather slow given parliament’s lackadaisical approach and the lack of action thereof in the pursuit of this bill. Could the cold feet approach adopted by parliament stem from the realization of how powerful an FOI bill can be in Ghana? Are the Parliamentarians so weary of the bill that they don’t want to pass it knowing the repercussions it will have on them in becoming law? 
Parliamentarians must remember what Thomas Freidman (1999), a New York Times International Affairs Correspondent said, “Governments that try to control information are fighting a losing battle and if they bother trying, will face exorbitant costs.” 
Hence, Parliament should move and not fumble with the ball in their court.
Cletus D. Kuunifaa, Long Island University, LIU Post, New York. Can be contacted at dipnibe@yahoo.com or Follow him on twitter @ckuunifaa
Reference
Epilogue: Securing the Republic (1822). James Madison to W.T. Barry. Chapter 18 Document
35, 4 Aug, 1822 9:103-9"	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"312"	2014-02-21	" Professor Kwame Karikari, the co-chair of Coalition on the Right to Information- Ghana, has stated that the final draft of Right to Information (RTI) bill was not good enough to stand the test of time.
 He said the bill, which is presently before Parliament, must be revised before it is passed into law.
 Prof. Karikari said this yesterday in Accra at a day’s capacity building workshop on access to information, organised by the coalition under the auspices of Commonwealth Human Rights International (CHRI).
 The workshop brought together public officials mandated to manage records and Information in selected public offices, to promote access to information through effective record management.
 The Coalition, which is an umbrella group of civil society organisations advocating the passage of an effective RTI legislation, organised the workshop on the theme: “Records Management, A lifeline to Effective Access to Information;
 Prof. Karikari, who chaired function which discussed access to information in relation to peoples’ right to development, good practices in records management and the RTI Bill, said the present draft bill would virtually prohibit most people.
 He said politician’s hesitation to pass a good bill which meets the aspirations of the people comes from the fear of being accountable for some of their actions and inaction.
 Prof. Karikari said some politicians were afraid of information, which would come to the public domain, and thus had sought to exempt many public institutions from offering information in the name of security threat.
 Mr. Akoto Ampaw, a legal practitioner and member of the coalition, disclosing some of the pertinent challenges the coalition has with the final draft, mentioned the exemptions, enforcement fees regimes, timely provision of information as some of the issues.
 With the exemption, he argued that because government holds office in the name of the people, it would be against the spirit of public trust and the constitution to hold information when demanded.
 Mr. Ampaw said if the information could not be disclosed for the sake of security issues, then the onus falls on the government to prove to all and sundry that there was reasonable necessity to exempt the information from the public.
 On the enforcement issue, he said if the government maintained using the Ministry of Justice to be the enforcement agency as stipulated in the bill, then government would be playing a role of a release and a player, which would not auger well for people seeking information.
 Mr. Ampaw said that if the information being sought would be detrimental to government business, it was likely that the ministry of Justice would be hesitant to rule for the information to be provided.
 He asked for a regime change for the envisage fees which would be charged under the law for the provision of information because it did not favour the poor in society.
 The legal practitioner said the timeliness in making information available was essential because getting it at the appropriate time would make the best sense.
 Mr. Ampaw said the situation where the bill stipulates a six months grace period before the information could be finally given or refused would not be in the best interest of those looking for information."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"313"	2014-02-19	" The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill, has expressed doubt about the motivation of Parliament to subject the Bill, currently before it, to serious scrutiny towards effective law for implementation.
 The Coalition has, therefore, called for mounting public pressure on both government and the legislature, to ensure that Ghanaians  are handed over an information law holistic enough to meet their needs and aspirations.
 “I can assure you that Parliament does not have the commitment or incentive to do a thorough review of the Bill, unless public pressure is put on it,” said Mr Akoto Ampaw, Steering committee member of the Coalition.
 Mr Ampaw made these remarks  at a capacity-building workshop for Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs),  charged with the responsibility of managing records/information in public offices.
 The workshop was organised on the theme: “Records Management; A Lifeline to Effective Access to Information,” by the Commonwealth Human Right Initiative (CHRI), to fashion out ways of promoting access to information through effective records management.
 Mr Ampaw cited systemic challenges of chaotic records keeping, lack of clarity in some clauses, too many repetitive exemptions, unlimited fee charges, and issues of timelines, as being dangerous processes involved in public access to information.
 He pointed out that, the Bill in its   current form,  did not measure up to international standards, and posed a serious obstacle in the ways of the citizenry to access information.
 Mr Ampaw also raised the issues of maximum disclosure and blanket statements “not relating to anything,” and said: “if the Bill is passed without any fundamental amendments, it will be tantamount to giving Ghanaians a raw deal.”
 The RTI Bill has been going back and forth among the executive, civil society organisations, and agencies, for about 13 years now, but still it is not a good one, said Professor Kwame Karikari, Co-Chairman of the Coalition.
 Prof Karikari said it was time Parliament scrutinised the Bill to connect to the daily lives of the people and their right to development.
 He called on the Public Archives and Administration Department of Ghana, to begin training its staff nationwide, and formulate proper record-keeping policies, since these are key ingredients to the successful implementation of an effective RTI Law.
 Professor Karikari allayed the fears of politicians, saying, 'you have nothing to fear, since the public only need the information to be able to contribute effectively to national development.'
 Ms Mina Mensah, Head of CHRI; Secretariat for the Coalition, explained that  citizens required information on health, tax, agriculture, human rights, voting, and many more to empower them.
 She said access to information was not meant to bastardize government, but to inform the populace about what was really happening in government circles."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"314"	2014-02-16	" .....What Difference Does That Make?
 By Cletus D Kuunifaa
 The notion of “You did, I do; I do, you do; outdoing, outwitting, doing people in “ is outmoded politics, obsolete and should be abhorred by all of us. What difference does it make in these numbers, if these presidential staffers are performing their duties to the best of their abilities? Additionally, isn’t it a constitutional mandate to fulfill per Section 11 of the Presidential Act 1993 (Act 463), which demands that the President submits a list of staffers to the House annually? The fact that parliament endorses the list from the executive makes these appointments even legitimate. Therefore, I find it a waste of time for people making reference to these numbers as if these guys are the highest paid officials in Ghana.
 What should rather be of concern is how to make sure Ghana is gaining from these appointments by the service these employees render to the nation. Bottom line, they must be qualified and competent enough individuals in their various fields of work. There must be supervision and monitoring to make sure that these employees perform their duties to the fullest. What is not appropriate to do is to be hurling insults and calling each other names in a way to paint one faction black and the other white just to gain some political capital? To say the least, this is uncalled for and at worst, amateurish in politics.
 I like, however, to connect the dots on this brouhaha about the disclosure of presidential staffers and state emphatically that there is need for the passage of the RTI bill, which is still languishing in Parliament? I have said and still maintain that access to information and transparency should be considered a vaccine for ensuring good governance and Ghana must gear up for this vaccine to ensure accountability and prevent corruption.
 At this point, at what stage is the FOI bill in Parliament? Is it even currently at a deliberative stage? Who brings it up to the floor for deliberation? Or is it languishing somewhere on the shelves in Parliament? Ghanaians need to know, now! We need answers to these questions, right now! We need answers urgently to these questions, because the issue of transparency is of much relevance to politics and to our political dispensation. Had we had an RTI law, we would have probably been in the know of these numbers earlier than expected. This would have undoubtedly added to the level of transparency in governance. Let me stress here and now that the benefits of passing an RTI bill now far outweighs the delay of its passage. The reasons are not farfetched: I have argued in one of my publications that information society must be located within a human rights framework in order to advocate for unrestrictive access to information, especially public information held by government (http://conference.ifla.org/past/2011/141-kuunifaa-en.pdf) I also share the belief that the value of information as a human right is unquestionable, and the reason why information is read into the guarantee of a human right which is spelled out in many of the international treaties and in national constitutions. Passing an RTI bill does not only play an important role in the aspect of human dignity, not to mention it being the best means of ascertaining the truth, but most crucially, it is a fundamental underpinning of democracy. As Mendel pointed out, the aspect of democracy is perhaps most crucial (2003) because at a more principled level, democracy is quintessentially about ensuring that governments perform in accordance with the will of the people.
 Let parliament do the heavy lifting of tabling the motion and discussing it to have this bill passed into law to operationalize the constitutional right to information under article 21(1) f of the 1992 constitution. This bill, when passed into law, will consolidate the rights of journalists and the public to access information from government officials and public institutions without hindrance. This will enhance transparency and make government officials accountable to the people they are supposed to serve. Thus, there would have been nothing to hide on the part of Government as citizen would have had access to information even when request is not made through the standout feature of the bill in the Proactive Disclosure clause.
 Cletus D. Kuunifaa, Long Island University, LIU Post, New York. Can be contacted at dipnibe@yahoo.com or Follow him on twitter @ckuunifaa
 Reference
 Kuunifaa, C. (2011).  Access to information legislation as a means to achieve transparency in 	Ghanaian governance: Lessons from the Jamaican experience. IFLA Journal. Vol. 38(2).
 Mendel , T. ( 2003). “Freedom of Information as an Internationally Protected Human Right” 	Retrieved Feb. 13, 2014 from www.article19.org"	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"315"	2013-11-25	"Kufour’s Looting Brigade Revealed
The NPP administration with Mr. J.A. Kufour as the then President of Ghana by default anyway was rather a kleptocracy whose organized thieving was measurable through an institutional packaging order, the international whistle blower WikiLeaks had said in Part 21 of 22 .
The revelation is that under President Kufuor’s property grabbing regime, 10 government institutions were the pacesetters in the loot of the Public Purse.
According to WikiLeaks, the 10 most corrupt institutions under the Kufour regime were;
1.	The Police
2.	Ministry of Education, Oh! Yes, the notorious Ghana Education Service came under they Radar of the erstwhile PNDC government in 1985 where officials of that Ministry Stole Billions of Ghana cedis and shared among themselves.
3.	The Customs Exercise and Preventive Service (CEPS)
4.	The Judiciary. 
5.	The Civil Service, Yes, if you doubt it, you just glance through the Auditor General’s report and you will  see the billions of cedis looted by Kufour’s ministers and other appointees with impunity
6.	The Ghana Health Service where Doctors and Nurses work to save lives and at times, if you are not rich and you dare fall sick and report at the hospital, your next home would be the mortuary.
7.	The Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG) – where they would constantly switch off electricity for weeks and when the fact bills comes, they will never be any reduction for the three weeks that power went off- it is always the same huge bills. 
8.	Ghana Politicians, No, I am a politician since the PNDC era to date 2013, but I have never been CITED for corruption and the only highest office I once occupied was a Board Member of the Ghana National Fire Services from 1998 to 2001 when we were removed en block and replaced by Kufuor’s NPP men and my allowance of over GH¢30.00 remained there to date. I was appointed by His Excellency Flt. J.J Rawlings.
According to the 2005 cable leaked from the American Embassy in Ghana, the rest of the 10 most corrupt institutions under Ex-Prez Kufuor were (9) The internal Revenue Service and (10) The Immigration Service respectively.
WikiLeaks have established that Ex-President Kufuor himself  was the King Pin of the wide spread corruption that was legalized in Ghana between 2001 -2008 since his administration had sidelined the late Vice President Aliu Mahama and replaced him with his brother-in-law Mr. J.H. Mensah who was appointed a Senior Minister. It was revealed that Mr. J.A. Mensah used the HIPC Benefit funds to sponsor the then ruling party’s patronage net works when President Kufuor set him over the funds to the spite of the late Aliu Mahama. President Kufour’s Chief of Staff, Mr. Kwado Mpiani is also revealed by earlier troves of Wiki Leaks to have been in the thick of a STATE LANDS LOOTING BRIGADE that evolved at the Osu Castle, the then Seat of government. It was the same Kwadwo Mpiani together with Charles Wereko Brobbey who were both in the dock of a Presidential Commission that looked into allegations of financial impropriety at the Ghana@50 Celebration and were both INDICTED, yet the two are still moving as free people because President Mills made the big mistake of investigating them with a Presidential Commission instead of using the Security Agencies. It is also a matter on record that the late President Mills Stated that he won’t INHERIT ANYBODY ELSE’S ENEMIES and nobody knew why he once made that statement. In his life time, he heard no evil, he saw no evil and did no evil, so the massive corruption and looting that took place in Ghana for 8 years under Kufour’s NPP government had been swept under the carpet by a Presidential Commission set up by the late President Mills, so NPP members must be the last people to blame President Mahama of Corruption after taking the country to ransom for 8 good months.
According to the WikiLeaks, the Judiciary under Kufuor whose latter head was state lands theft beneficiary, Mrs. Georgina Theodora Wood was so corrupt that a Supreme Court Judge had to complain bitterly to the US Embassy officials. The Supreme Court Chief Justice Kingsley Acquah admitted to Ambassador Yates in her farewell call that judicial corruption is “ A BIG TERRIBLE PROBLEM” He noted that the Police  recently discovered a judicial clerk embezzling funds using duplicate stamps. In July, the Judicial Council charged two High Court judges with stealing GH¢115MILLION ($13,000) deposited as fines.WikiLeak added. it went on to state that Theodora Georgina Wood who is still the current Chief Justice has managed to hold down her position in spite of glaring evidence that there are question marks  on her integrity.
In the education sector, WikiLeaks revealed that under Kufour, it together with the Health sector had the greatest  mis allocation of funds. The Assistant Director of the serious Fraud Office, A Tetteh Mensah told Poloff that the Ministries of Health and Education had the greatest mis allocation of funds in the GOG. WikiLeaks quoted. We will not allow anybody to sweep the facts under the carpet. According to the leaked cable, the mis-allocations mainly happened because schools and clinics that were paid for from government budget allocations ended up NEVER BEING Built. The money just ended up in some peoples pocket all in the name of property owing democracy. That is J.A. Kufour, the so called Gentle Giant for you. Another strategy that was widely employed under the Kufour regime to steal with impunity from the Health and Education Ministries was the massive insertion of Ghost Names in their payrolls.
In 2001 the Minister of Finance reported that ghost names on public payroll alone cost the state an estimated $33 million that was 300 billion Ghana cedis in financial losses annually, the leak revealed. In a Ghana Integrity Initiative  that was conducted in the era of the Kufour regime, the Ministry of Education was perceived as the second most corrupt government  entity in Ghana. That institution had been a corruption ridden organization since the PNDC era in 1985 to date, so the government must look at that important Ministry and the GES WITH EAGLE Eyes, otherwise,  our FUTURE LEADERS being trained by that Ministry would face a bleak future. ON September 2nd 2011, the Police revealed that 22,000 dollars (GH¢200,000,00) million cedis had been embezzled by an employee of the Ghana Education Service in the Upper East Region. WikiLeaks stated again, in October 2005, Media reports exposed that the Ministry of Education had decided to sole source a $28 million contract for books without seeking the required prior approval from the Public Procurement Board. A BIG SHAKE UP IN THE GES like the PNDC did in 1985 will remove the rot from the Ministry of Education which had been a GOLDMINE for PEN ROBBERS and ORGANISED CROOKS who are worse than ARMED ROBBERS WIELDING GUNS on the High Ways. I also suggest that the government should set aside the Presidential Commission Report that was presented to the late Prez. Mills and hand the suspected NPP officials over to the Police C.I.D, BNI, EOCO and other Security Agencies to enable them squeeze the suspect to vomit the loot for the past 8 years under J. A. Kufuor.
It is a matter on record that former President J. A Kufuor made it clear to Ghanaians that HE WILL NEVER PUNISH OFFENDING MINISTERS IN ORDER TO DESTROY THE NPP. With this open endorsement of verbal vituperation, breeds the practice and ON and ON, we all match with it. In a discussion on Metro T.V. Good Evening Ghana, Ex. Pres. Kufuor described his hellish 8 years reign as well as his Ministers and even questioned the host to show evidence of a single corrupt act in his government from 2001-2008. As for me, I do not blame such a tall liar like J.A. Kufuor because if our late President Mills had not issued a Presidential FIAT by, telling NDC members to “Let It Be”- we would have exposed all these Political criminals in the NPP led by Mr. J.A. Kufuor for Ghanaians to see. On that programme, Mr. Kufuor defended his blood soaked regime with stout elegance and rather saw ALMOST EVERYTHING WRONG WITH THE National Democratic Congress (NDC) which he made several attempts to destroy in the past eight years but failed. Mr. Kufuor never spared a thought to even identify a single good thing in the previous NDC administration which he never wanted to see in government again.
It will be recalled that Nana Akufo Addo did not congratulate the late President Mills after he lost the 2008 elections to Mills, and this could be seen as demonstrating lack of fairness and respect for his opponent. If one is not prepared to lose as much as he or she determines to win, then he or she is UNFIT FOR ANY RACE. Though defeat is very painful, which some times leads to irrational temper tantrums especially among high profile personalities, politicians must have the nerve to tame such monstrous emotions to breed peace.
WATCH THESE DEVELOPMENTS
In January 2001 Mr. J.A. Kufour was sworn in as President of the Republic of Ghana  he increased petrol price by 100%.  No one coughed in Ghana.
In AUGUST 2002, the NPP increased electricity tariff by 85%. No one coughed again in Ghana and the T.U.C saw it all as NORMAL. The first tariff increase by the NPP government was in March 2001 where there was an increase of 104%. The T.U.C, G.M.A. and the so called civil society groups in Ghana all saw that as NORMAL. Then again, in 2004, the NPP increased petrol price by another 100% and the GPRTU never called any press conference, while the  TUC and GMA all remained silent. Therefore if all these institutions are integral wings of the NPP, they must all come out boldly to let the innocent workers know their true stand in National Affairs for they are more political than claiming to be neutral. This is very shameful. Let them clear the air, once and for all since Prez Mahama will leave The Flagstaff House in 2021 period. 
1.	President Mahama instituted the Special Task Force to monitor and report revenue collected and expose malpractices at the various posts in the country in April 2013. These are all stringent measures put in place by the NDC government to fight corrupt practices among public officials and the various institutions in the public sector. The President needs commendation and not condemnation, so I say Aluta Continua!
2.	The Right To Information Bill (RTI) aimed at ensuring easy access to information was sent to Parliament by the cabinet and has passed through its first reading stage in Parliament on November 12th 2013.
In 2002, the NPP government drafted the first RTI BILL to operationalize the constitutional right to information under Article 21(1) of the 1992 Constitution, but the document could not be sent to Parliament because the NPP hate transparency and had legalized corruption for the 8 years that Kufour was President of Ghana by default from 2001 0 2008.
The 1992 Constitution says that every Ghanaian citizen has the right to know how the government is functioning and because President Mahama is very honest, Patriotic and transparent, that is the reason why he sent the RT1 BILL to parliament to the annoyance of the violent prone NPP.Is anybody listening? I shall return when the need arise. I am done . “Jaanbie Iwaii” Aluta Continua”.
……………………………..
Clement Sangaparee
United Cadres Front
Obuasi
E-Mail clementsang@yahoo.com
DISTRIBUTION
ALL MEDIA HOUSE
ACCRA/GHANA"	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"316"	2013-11-17	"The late Professor J.E.A. Mills was sworn in as president of the Republic of Ghana on January 7th 2009 after beating the violent prone NPP led by Nana Akuffo Addo in December 2008 and the 2009 Run-Off.
President Mills took over from Ex-President J.A. Kufour who became Ghana’s President by default from January 2001-December 2008 and LEGALISED CORRUPTION IN GHANA for eight (8) with impunity. The slogan of the NPP was PROPERITY OWNING DEMOCRACY and it paved the way for several state bungalows to be sold at cheap prices to NPP members. They turned themselves in   to a LOOTING BRIGADE and LOOTED STATE PROPERTIES with impunity. The late president Mills stated that he was the FATHER FOR ALL so no NPP members would be sacked to be replaced by any NDC member simply because the NPP had lost power. He added that he would NOT DISMISS ANY CIVIL AND PUBLIC SERVANT who are known NPP SUPPORTERS-YES THEY WERE ALL LEFT INTACT. He never told NPP CIVIL and public servants to PROCEED ON LEAVE-NEVER TO RETURN because they are now opposition supporters as President Kufour did from January 2001-2008. When ever they (NPP) are in opposition they have accused every government of corruption. President J.A. Kufour and his Asante/Akyem dominated cabinet members told Ghanaian that they did not go into government because of MONEY. On July 2002; they claimed that they already have their own houses, benzes, pajeros and land cruisers before winning power in January 2001 which was FALSE. This is because from 2001-2008 they stole government Benzes and Limousines, prime lands in Kumasi and Accra with J.A. Kufour buying 12 acres of land at Ridge, a suburb of Kumasi for Gh¢4.000.00.  Dr. Frimpong  Boateng bought the bungalow he was allocated as head of Korlebu Heart Department. Ex President Kufour also took over a government mansion for himself. The list is endless. The so called affordable houses they claimed to be building for public servants have been shared among themselves on behalf of the public servants and the poor in Ghana. 
ON CORRUPTION
The NPP administration went so wild that they began to engage in 419 scams. They invented companies and pretended that Ghana was going to collect loans from those very ghost companies. The idea was to make the government pay up front fees such as “Commitment fees” “ Premiums” “Arrangement fees” “Management fees” etc so that they would in the end, say that the loan did not materialize. They knew that by that time, the government would already have paid those fees into THEIR OWN ACCOUNTS. What a bunch of de Africanized political criminals leading the NPP.
NANA AKUFFO ADDO-NPP FLA GBEARER
At the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology in Kumasi where the Kumasi Peace Accord was signed, Nana Akuffo Addo told Ghanaians that he had never been cited for corruption, yet the Auditor General’s Report of 2005 INDICTED HIM on what happened at the Ministry of Foreign Africans when he was the foreign minister. A colossal amount of $1,446,396 cash was withdrawn from the Ministry’s Special Collections Accounts of Seven Embassies without the knowledge of the Controllers and Accountant General. Is Nana Akufo Addo who wants to become the President of Ghana at all cost TRUST WORTHY? Yet on 7th January 2001, Prez. Kufour stated thus: Under by administration, there will be zero tolerance for corruption, and I would personally set the example. Yes, Kufour personally set the example in a negative way on as corruption was rather 100% in Ghana and the suspected corrupt Ghanaians were those who do not belong to the NPP from 2001-2008. Kufour became the most corrupt and greedy President since independence in 1957. Unable to fight corruption because he was himself was corrupt Hear him; What do you expect me to do about corruption? After all, it is a sin that dates back to the time of Adam and Eve. This in plain stupid nonsense on the part of J.A Kufour and fraudulent NPP Party. We must not sweep all these under the carpet and rather blame Prez. Mahama.
WE MUST BE FAIR TO PRESIDENT MAHAMA
The then Vice President Mahama was sworn in as President of the Republic of Ghana after the untimely death of the late sitting president J.E.A. Mills. 
In accordance with the 1992 constitution. On the orders of the late President Mills, the massive corruption that was unprecedented in the history of Ghana from 2001-2008 under the NPP Administration was left intact to the extent that MMDCE’s appointed by the NPP administration were allowed to stay in office and work with the ruling NDC government in 2009 until it appointed its own  MMDCE’s. This was very strange and had never happened since Ghana’s independence in 1957 up till date 2013. President Mills issued a Fiat by saying LET IT BE and that was it, no one raised a finger, on one coughed within the NDC as the Massive Corruption Perpetuated by the Violent Prone NPP was left intact on the orders of Mills, so what are some people taking about? During the 2012 general elections all NPP leaders described President Mahama as a “Spare Tyre” only fit to complete a journey because they (NPP) members thought it was a forgone conclusion for them to grab political party by beating the NDC. However, the demeanor of John Mahama alone won him the 2012 general elections and the violent prone NPP leaders became so dazed and confused that they rushed to the Supreme Court with the aim of passing through the back door of the Court to win the elections. After 8 long months of litigation, their case was thrown out by the Supreme Court. Their next strategy is to use organized labour led by the Trades Union Congress (TUC) to embark on a nation wide strike in   order to make the country ungovernable. The next group of people are most Head Masters and Head Mistresses of senior high schools who deliberately charged un-authorized school fees ranging from Gh¢1,200 to Gh¢2.008 instead of the approved fees of Gh¢600 for day students and Gh¢700 for boarding students. All these are measures put in place to make the NDC government unpopular, but whether the NPP and its innocent supporters like it or not, President Mahama is going to walk to and from the Flagstaff House until January 2021 when he will hand over to the next NDC presidential candidate.
DAN BOTWE
The Member of Parliament for Okere in the Eastern region was on air ordering the President of the Republic Of Ghana to come to Parliament and explain the reason why the sacked Madam Victoria Hammah the former deputy minister for  information. Hon. Dan Botwe must read the 1992 constitution very well because the President owe nobody an apology at all and will therefore not explain the reason for dismissing the Minister so Dan Botwe must shut up and stop making noise.
Ever since President Mahama was sworn in as President of the Republic of Ghana on 7th January 2013, the Largest opposition party the NPP never recognized him as the validly Elected President until the Supreme Court ruled that he was validly elected President of Ghana, which the NPP accepted unwillingly.
Even after the judgment the NPP still believe falsely that they were robbed of victory by the ruling NDC government.
MAHAMA FIGHTS CORRUPTION
1.	Determined to fight corruption in Ghana, he appointed a Sole Commissioner on Judgment Debts and he is uncovering dirty deals from the public and civil service including the Attorney General’s Department.
2.	He has instructed the Attorney General to prosecute all those implicated in the GYEEDA REPORT.
3.	The Public Office Accountability Bill will soon be presented to Parliament as his indication to fight corruption.
4.	He has launched the code of conduct for Public Office holders. Therefore, what else does the critics of the President want him to do in just three months in office? The President accepted the fact there is economic hardships in the country, but who cause am?
5.	President Mahama instituted the Special Task Force to monitor and report revenue collected and exposes malpractices at the various posts in the country in April 2013. These are all stringent measures put in place by the NDC government to fight corrupt practices among public officials and the various institutions in the public sector. The President needs commendation and not condemnation, so I say, Aluta continua!
6.	The right to information bill (RTI) aimed at ensuring easy access to information was sent to parliament by the cabinet and has passed through its first reading stage in Parliament on November 12th 2013.
In 2002, the NPP government drafted the first RTI BILL to operationlise the constitutional right to information under article 21(1) of the 1992 constitution, but the document could not be sent to Parliament because the NPP hate transparency and had legalized corruption for the 8 years that Kufour was President of Ghana by default from 2001 0 2008.
We must blame he NPP leaders for taking the country to ramson for 8 solid months when they sent that hopeless petition to the Supreme Court and it was finally thrown out. Confidence in the economy of Ghana was low, in fact so low that no foreign investor will come and invest in the country.
An amount of 2 billion were lost to Ghana because of that senseless petition sent to the Supreme Court by the violent prone NPP.
It will therefore be most UNFAIR for any person or group of persons to blame   the 3 month old government of the NDC. I say, three months, because the President was confirmed as validly elected for the second time by the Supreme Court after the Electoral Commissioner first declared the results on December 9th 2012.  
The President therefore started work in earnest on 1st September, 2013 and this month, November is his third month in office, so we must all be very fair to the President and   judge him in 2021 after he have finished his two 4 year term of office period. President John Dramani Mahama, the workaholic, is not important, but our country, Ghana, we must all get involved to ensure that we achieve he Better Ghana Agenda.
The 1992 constitution says that every Ghanaian citizen has the right to know how the government is functioning and because President Mahama is very honest, patriotic and transparent, he have sent the RT1 BILL to Parliament to the annoyance of the violent prone NPP.Is anybody listening? I shall return when the need arise. I am done. “Jaanbie Iwaii” Aluta Continua”.
……………………………..
Clement Sangaparee
United Cadres Front
Obuasi
E-Mail clementsang@yahoo.com
DISTRIBUTION
ALL MEDIA HOUSE
ACCRA/GHANA"	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"317"	2013-11-15	" President John Dramani Mahama on Friday announced that no government official would be allowed to buy a state bungalow or state vehicle.
 He said the government would soon come out with a measure that would enable all government officials to acquire their vehicles on hire purchase basis.
 President Mahama said this when he met anti-corruption organisations at the Flagstaff House, Kanda.
 The groups included Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice and the Anti-Corruption Coalition.
 He said the directive would enable the government to stop the practice where Ministers and other public officials were given the option to buy official vehicles and bungalows they were using during their tenure of office.
 President Mahama said the government was waiting for the passage of the Rights to Information Bill, Public Officers Code of Conduct Bill and the Whistle Blowers Bill, and had abrogated the Subah Info-Solutions contract as investigations were being carried out.
 He said the government had also suspended all payments under the Ghana Youth Employment and Entrepreneurial Development Authority (GYEEDA) and a ban had been placed on award of new contracts.
 He said the government would take legal action against officials of GYEEDA who would be found to have misconducted themselves.
 President Mahama said he had directed the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General to expedite action on the GYEEDA Bill in order to decentralize their projects and programmes.
 He said to ensure maximum transparency in the country, the government would soon launch an online complaints forum for people to send their concerns and complaints for attention.
 President Mahama promised to strengthen the capacity of all anti-corruption organisations to perform their duties creditably and would concentrate on prevention and stiff punishment for culprits of current investigations.
 He commended the National Anti-Corruption Action Plan (NACAP) and called on Parliament to expedite action on the passage of the bill.
 Madam Loretta Vivian Lamptey, Commissioner of the CHRAJ who spoke on behalf of other groups, appealed to the government to invest in NACAP to enable them to perform their duties to eliminate corrupt practices.
 She also appealed to the government to establish a democracy fund and hip the enthusiasm of key government institutions to adequately participate in the fight against corruption in the country.Below is the full speech delivered by the president
 Statement by H.E John Dramani Mahama, President of the Republic of Ghana, at a meeting with the Commission for Human Rights and Administrative Justice and its Anti­-Corruption Partners at Flagstaff House, AccraNovember 15, 2013
 I am happy to have this opportunity to speak candidly on the issue of corruption and the way it attempts to pervade every layer of our society, from the political to the personal. Corruption takes an enormous toll on the ability of a government to function effectively, on the hopes and dreams of individual citizens, and, ultimately, on the morale of an entire nation.
 It is an issue that we all agree must be addressed aggressively but in order to do that, we must also recognise that corruption is an issue that must be defined and discussed responsibly.
 Corruption has been high on the national agenda for many years; but long before that, it was a central theme of gossip and rumours, public finger-pointing and partisan acrimony. It has in our present day become something of a political club that opposing parties use to beat each other over the head with.
 Since the time of Ghana’s First Republic, there has not been a single president or presiding government that has not been accused of corruption. This makes sense, given the history of post-independence Africa and the pattern of behaviour that was set from country to country by the governing elite; that pattern being win or seize power and then “to the victor go the spoils.” And the losers, were the average hardworking citizens, families, communities, and countries that, for decades, were crippled by the greed of other people’s individual self-interest.
 Given this history, it makes sense that our citizens are often very mistrustful of those in positions of power and access. And they have cause to be. But times have changed; Africa has changed; Ghana, which has also been no exception to the continent-wide syndrome of seize-loot-and-leave, has changed.
 Democratic governance, a free independent media, vigilant civil society, bold anti-corruption institutions have all combined to check the impunity with which corruption was perpetrated in the past. Pillars of Good Governance are being erected, pillars that are firmly anchored by the Rule of Law and a constitutional democracy. Strong anti-money laundering legislation, an active Financial Intelligence to track transfer of “dirty money” make it more difficult to hide the proceeds of corruption.
 Nonetheless, corruption persists. It still persists, right alongside those institutions, as though it is an institution in and of itself.
 The accusation of corruption against an individual is an easy one to make. However, if we truly wish to rid our societies of this cancer, then we must start talking about it rationally, realistically and responsibly. Over the years, we have seen different governments take measures to fight the corruption that exists within. Sometimes those measures were drastic; people were shot dead, jailed, or censured. Sometimes those drastic measures were indeed effective, but by and large they were not viable long-term solutions.
 In other words, corruption, when defined not as the action of a single individual but as an institution, cannot be fixed with ad hoc knee-jerk reactions. It takes an approach that is also systemic; an approach that focuses on education as much as punishment; an approach that encourages a societal abhorrence for corruption on any level. It takes sustained vigilance.
 It also takes transparency, accountability and leadership—all of which, as President, I am committed to giving our nation and our people.
 I do this not because it is required of me as President. I do this because I am first and foremost a Ghanaian—and like any other Ghanaian from Bawku to Berekum, from Kumasi to Axim—it is my civic duty.
 Ghanaians are no longer satisfied with palliatives and long-winded statements, or with one-off solutions that do not address the problem as something systemic. We want, and we need, action now. We need action to curb the corruption that currently exists and we need action to prevent corruption from flourishing and impeding our national progress.
 Over the years, I have made several appeals to the institutions responsible for fighting corruption to promptly investigate allegations of corruption and taking swift action to honor the public's trust in them. We know our institutions are weak and are facing major challenges. They lack adequate manpower, expertise and resources. However, for our institutions to remain relevant, they must show that they are doing the maximum they can with the little they have.
 As a Ghanaian, I share the anxiety and frustration that our people are expressing every day. There can be no justification for any official or public employee to take advantage of the weaknesses in the institutions they are to serve in to facilitate the crimes they are paid to prevent. Neither can there be any justification for blatant institutional negligence.
 Succeeding in the fight against corruption requires agencies in various autonomous institutions -the executive, legislature and judiciary- as well as, the general public to play their part and play it well and we must think outside the box because the old ways will not meet the expectations of our people.
 As a people our ability to fight corruption is weakened and limited when we entrust it to only the political elite or limit our social responsibility only to talking about it. We need a paradigm shift.
 I am of the strong opinion that the key to resolving the corruption problem is strengthening our capacity to prevent, and where it has already happened, detect, investigate, retrieve and successfully prosecute.
 Every corrupt act has multiple witnesses who may have nothing to gain from it and are prepared to contribute to fighting it. So, we must create the enabling environment that empowers such people to contribute their quota. In essence, there is an urgent need to broaden the framework for fighting corruption. We must break the syndrome of sympathy for perpetrators who got caught, and muster the courage to report acts of wrong-doing.
 My Government is ready to engage the various independent Anti-Corruption and Governance institutions, including the CHRAJ, EOCO, etc. That is why, under the umbrella of the CHRAJ, we have developed and adopted, at Cabinet level, this new anti-corruption instrument, the 10-year NACAP (2012-2021).
 Let me take this opportunity to say a big THANK YOU to all of you for your immense sacrifices towards the completion of this national agenda. I am looking forward to a new partnership with the various institutions and organizations you all represent.
 Let me take this opportunity to appeal to our friends in the media, all religious organizations, traditional leaders, and indeed, the entire Ghanaian public, to see this new instrument as a window of opportunity for us all to develop our country through a collective effort to tackle the canker of corruption.
 Two important instruments in the fight against corruption are still pending in Parliament: One is the Right to Information Bill. I hereby call on Parliament to treat this bill with the urgency it. I undertake to give my assent expeditiously as soon as this bill is approved.
 The other is the National Anti Corruption Action Plan (NACAP), which work I had the privilege of commissioning while I was still the Vice President. The NACAP spells out specific activities for sustained transparency and anticorruption. The NACAP was laid in the house in April and is currently awaiting adoption by Parliament. Here again I call for urgent action by Parliament in the adoption of this plan.
 Considering the extended period between the completion of NACAP and its adoption, the budget of GHC65m that was proposed would certainly need to be revalidated following its adoption by Parliament.
 Government also signed up to the Open Government Partnership Initiative. On the national action plan and implementation road map, we have made progress in achieving many milestones in the 4 thematic areas. On Transparency we are on track and work is ongoing on the Fiscal Responsibility Bill. RTI bill is before Parliament. The PIAC is being given every support and space to do its work. And we are working with the CRC Implementation Committee to amend CHRAJ’s constitutional provisions.
 We believe issues of strengthening CHRAJ and effectively resourcing it should be taken out of turn and dealt with. In the meantime I am speaking with the Minister for Finance to, within the constraints of the budget, increase funding to anti-corruption agencies.
 Also, a percentage of proceeds of corruption when recovered should be paid to anti-corruption agencies to resources them.
 On participation, the Minister for Local Government and rural development and the Decentralization oversight C’tee are working on processes to improve participation of not only CSO’s but all resident of the district in the work of the Assemblies.
 On Accountability, Cabinet has passed the Public Officers Code of Conduct Bill and it is undergoing final redrafting before being laid in Parliament.
 On technology and innovation work is advanced on the E-Immigration project. Work on GIFMIS has taken off and is progressing steadily.
 We will also be launching an online complaints platform in the next few weeks.
 I commit again to work hard to achieve the milestones we set ourselves in the initiative within the agreed 2013-2014 time frame.
 However while awaiting the NACAP, RTI and other anti-corruption instruments we cannot treat that as an excuse for any delay in our fight against corruption. There are a few administrative actions that I have taken to keep us marching forward in this mission, and I am happy to be able to share them with you today:
 1. I have instructed the Minister for Youth and Sports to: a. Suspend with immediate effect, all payments under all GYEEDA contracts, except the payment of arrears to workers up to the end of the year. b. Complete the review of all modules and accompanying contracts under GYEEDA by the 15th of December and, before 31st December 2013, to cancel all contracts that do not pass the “value for money” test. c. Place a moratorium on the creation of new modules under GYEEDA.
 2. I have instructed the Minister for Justice and Attorney-General/EOCO and the Minister of Finance to work with the Minister for Youth and Sports to achieve the following by 31st December 2013:
 a. Secure refunds of monies wrongfully paid to or appropriated by any individuals or companies from contracts with SADA, GYEEDA, and the Ghana Revenue Authority (GRA) and to retrieve the monies wrongfully paid to Waterville and Isofoton;
 b. Initiate legal action against the individuals or companies to secure the refunds and/or to punish them for wrongdoing;
 I just received this morning, an update from the boss of EOCO on the status of their investigations. I have asked EOCO to make that update known to the public in order for the public to know what action is being taken.
 3. I have instructed the Minister for Justice and Attorney-General to expedite work on the GYEEDA Bill for submission to Parliament. The Bill is expected to ensure proper oversight, efficiency in management of GYEEDA. The bill must focus on decentralizing the program to ensure local ownership and real benefits to our communities.
 4. I have instructed the Minister for Finance and Minister for Justice and Attorney General to review and advice on a suspension of the contract with Subah Infosolutions seeing us the contract was not signed by the appropriate authorized Government representative.
 5. I have directed the Minister for Lands and Natural Resources to: a. Present a Plan within 2 weeks for ensuring transparency under the Accra Redevelopment Policy; b. In the spirit of transparency publish the names of all beneficiaries of the policy by the 16th of December 2013; c. Review all the transactions involved in the implementation of the policy within 3 calendar months from today; and d. Scrap the policy that allows public officers to purchase state bungalows allocated to them as official residences.
 6. I have instructed the Chief of Staff, as of today, not to grant any request by any government official to purchase any state vehicle that was assigned to them for official use. Disposal of aged government vehicles must be publicly and transparently done. A scheme is being discussed under which Senior Public Officials will be able to acquire their own vehicles under hire purchase from vehicle dealerships.
 7. I have directed for the re-registration with GV number plates of all Government vehicles to proceed in earnest and be completed by the 1st quarter of next year.
 8. As of last week, I have constituted a Committee which will determine as one of the factors for the continuous stay in office of a Minister of State or head of any government Department or Agency, an annual report on the extent to which the recommendations of the Auditor-General’s Report have been implemented in your MDA.
 9. Under my instruction the Minister for Justice and Attorney-General has submitted a first series of cases from the Auditor General’s Report to EOCO for investigation and possible prosecution before the Financial Tribunal
 10. All MDAs must present justification for application for any sole sourcing to cabinet for scrutiny before submission to the PPA
 11. Any contracts above GHC5m recurring in multiple budgets must be made public through publication in the newspaper or on the new contract management database portals to be launched soon.
 12. I am awaiting anxiously the report of the Sole Commissioner on Judgment Debts and pledge to deal firmly with the report when it is presented.
 13. Finally, I have requested the Minister in Charge of Government Business in Parliament to rally his colleagues in Parliament to:
 a. Ensure the quick approval of the National Anti-Corruption Action Plan; b. Ensure the early Passage of the Right to Information Bill; c. Ensure the passage of the Whistleblower (Amendment) Bill; and d. Ensure the passage of the Public Officers Code of Conduct Bill.
 If we are to sustain this fight against corruption, I expect the support and involvement of all Ghanaians. We must disrupt the status quo and create a paradigm shift. We must create the sort of environment in our society that empowers people to take a stand.
 Every corrupt act has multiple witnesses. You may have had nothing to do with it, and you may have nothing to gain from it, but you must be prepared to contribute to fighting it. As citizens of this country each of us has a voice, and each voice carries weight. What we say matters. What we do matters.
 Our ability to fight corruption is weakened when we entrust action to only the political elite, and when we limit our social responsibility to only talking and gossiping about it, making casual allegations and ignoring our call to action. The more people who get involved in this fight against corruption, the stronger our chances of success.
 My government is determined to bring the maximum transparency and accountability to the public processes that have been a fertile ground for the germination and growth of corruption. If we stand side by side in this and work in
 partnership—government agencies, private sector businesses and organizations, as well as individual citizens working within their communities—we will be able to bring an end to the institution of corruption in this country and perhaps even serve as a model for other countries on the continent to emulate. I look forward to your cooperation.
 Thank you for your kind attention."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"318"	2013-10-17	" The right of citizens to seek information on governance and other issues of concern to them is generally not to hound politicians or public servants over supposed corrupt practices.
 Rather, the active exercise of that right, especially where it has been properly documented, creates a policy-responsive society, as information represents the fuel that powers development.
 Mina Mensah, Regional Coordinator, Africa Office of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) made this observation Wednesday in Ho at a training workshop on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill for selected people including tertiary students, Assembly Members and the media.
 She said the availability or otherwise of information to people directly affects their well-being.
 Ms Mensah therefore, expressed reservations about the slow approach of government and parliament to passing the RTI Bill into law in Ghana.
 She said while government had given the undertaken to work with parliament for the bill to be passed, the approach from the executive and legislature, regarding the issue had been disappointing.
 She stated that in 2010, the RTI Bill was presented to parliament, whose relevant working committee went round the country to collate views to inform work on it.
 “But as I speak now it is difficult to tell where the Bill is at the moment and what changes have been made,” Ms Mensah said.
 She said it was important the public clamoured for the Bill to be passed into Law, so that the challenges faced by other pro-human rights laws, such as the Domestic Violence Law and the Disability Act, would be avoided.
 Ms Mensah suggested that there was the need to remove the blanket exemptions contained in the RTI Bill, shorten the time frame for information disclosure, review fees and also provide an independent enforcement and monitoring mechanism under the law.
 She added that the RTI should be extended to private institutions and chieftains, and that sanctions should be prescribed for unnecessary delays to give out information.
 Ms Mensah said additionally, the law should specify a maximum time limit for implementation and also compel both public and private bodies to carefully manage their information for easy location.
 She said administrative fees that were charged for processing information should rather be lodged into accounts that could be accessed by implementing agencies, adding that such fees should not be put into the consolidated fund.
 Ms Mensah called for the recruitment of Information Officers who will be trained and charged with dealing with requests.
 Touching on its advantages, Miss Esther Ahulu, CHRI Project Officer observed that RTI was the “heart of all rights” as it promoted transparency which, in turn, brightened investment prospects.
 Other issues discussed at the workshop included processes of requesting for information.
 Participants at the workshop were put into three groups to identify certain areas of concern and demand information from the appropriate bodies.
 Miss Ahulu said the CHRI would monitor each group to ensure that requests for information were presented to appropriate bodies and the needed information retrieved."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"319"	2013-09-28	" The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Africa Office, has admonished government to pass an effective Right to Information (RTI) Bill in the shortest possible time.
 “Walk the talk and give meaning to Ghanaians’ right to know by passing an effective and efficient RTI Law. Citizens have the right to know things that have a direct impact on their lives,” CHRI said in a statement.
 The statement, signed by Mina Mensah, CHRI Africa Regional Co-ordinator, said the Right to Information was a fundamental human right recognised by various international and regional legal instruments.
 Ghana’s Constitution in Article 21 (1) (f) recognises this fundamental right for all persons and yet no specific legislation had been passed to guide it, the statement said.
 The International Right to Know Day is a day observed globally by human rights activists and civil society organisations every September 28 to raise awareness on the individual’s right to access government held information.
 Even though Ghana prides itself as a beacon of hope in democratic governance in Africa, it lacked a legal framework that would underpin two basic tenets of democracy: accountability and transparency - an effective RTI law, the statement noted.
 It added that the “the lack of RTI law places a dent on the governance system of this country.”
 Ghana has signed unto the Open Government Partnership (OGP); an international initiative that seeks to secure concrete commitments from governments to promote transparency, enhance citizen’s participation, promote accountability and adopt new technologies to enhance good governance.
 This, therefore, makes it critical for Ghana to have in a place a Right to Information law that would meet the OGP standard.
 The CHRI said: “Elected officials and public officers who are supposed to act in our best interest have taken the good people of this country for a ride for far too long and enough is enough. It is an undeniable truth that information is power and power is access to information. This has clearly come to the fore with current happenings in this country, particularly in relation to the judgement debts saga and how lack of information is costing the Ghanaian tax payer money we cannot afford to lose.”
 The CHRI said access to information strengthened democracy, good governance, transparency, accountability, economic growth and development, poverty reduction, the fight against corruption and prevented abuse of power.
 The statement further indicated that the success of any democratic regime lay in the creation of an environment that ensured that people could freely determine their political, economic, social and cultural systems through active participation in all aspects of decision-making that affected their lives.
 As the world marks International Right to Know Day, “the good people of Ghana have the right to know. They cannot know without an effective law in place,” the statement said.
 The CHRI, therefore, called on President John Dramani Mahama to ensure the fulfilment of promises he had made on public platforms regarding the RTI Bill.
 “We call on our elected representatives in Parliament to act in the best interest of the electorate to whom they are accountable, to amend the bill when it is laid before them and pass an effective RTI Bill into law. We call on the good people of Ghana to rise up and demand a legal framework that will enable them to enjoy their human and constitutionally guaranteed right to access information,” the statement said."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"320"	2013-09-28	" Civil Society Organisations have called on government to stop the political rhetoric and pass the Right to Information bill as the world marks International Right to Know day today.
 Perfector of Sentiments Foundation (POS), human rights NGO focused on youth and children’s Development and Rights, in a statement to the Ghana News Agency on Saturday to make the Right to Know Day, expressed disappointment about the delay in passing the RTI Bill, which was drafted in 2002.
 The statement signed by Mr Jonathan Osei Owusu, POS Executive Director said, “CSO are disappointed at policy makers who have manned the affairs of this nation spanning over the past ten (10) years.
 “In the NDC manifesto for the 2008 electoral campaign, the promise was made to see to a quick passage of the bill. Such promise formed a core component of the Campaign; we are yet to see commitment to the passage of the bill”.
 The statement urged the media to make the contents of the draft bill public; the status of the bill approved by Cabinet in June of 2013; and challenged government to demonstrated commitment to pass the bill.
 “We call on all the good citizens of Ghana to support not just the speedy passage of the RTI Bill but also an effective Law that meets International standard,” the statement stated."	11	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"321"	2013-08-23	" Mrs Mena Mensah, Regional Coordinator, Africa Office of the Commonwealth of Human Rights Initiative, said the Right to Information Bill had many challenges which needed to be amended before it was passed.
 She expressed worry that Cabinet said it had approved the bill, which is yet to be put before Parliament, but its content and inputs made were still not known to the public, especially civil society organisations which are masterminding the passage of the bill.
 Mrs Mensah was speaking at a training workshop on the RTI, organized by CHRI in collaboration with Mission of Hope Society and sponsored by Open Society Institute, a civil society organization.
 The Commonwealth of Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) is a Non-Governmental Organisation that advocates the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
 The workshop aims at creating awareness on citizens’ right to information and building a constituency committed to seeking information based on provision in existing laws.
 It was attended by assembly members, civil society organizations, media practitioners and students from tertiary institutions.
 Mrs Mensah explained that the draft RTI Bill had exempted many public office holders and private institutions from giving out information to seekers adding that this needed to be considered.
 She said in March 2012, the Parliamentary Select Committee on Communications and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, held a review meeting at which it was decided that certain key issues within the Bill needed to be revisited or improved upon in order to bring it in conformity with international Human Rights standards and best practices.
 Mrs Mensah noted with concern that civil society organisations had not gained access to the content of the RTI Bill which Cabinet said it had approved to ascertain whether those key issues identified by the committee had been considered.
 She recommended that the Cabinet-approved Bill ought to be made public for civil society organisations, NGOs and concerned individuals and groups to know the content and make, if necessary, meaningful contributions.
 Mrs Mensah explained that the passage of the RTI would facilitate accelerated national development as Ghana’s choice of democracy entailed active participation by all and sundry.
 She said it was only when citizens were well informed that they could make meaningful contributions for national development.
 Madam Esther Ahulu, Project Officer of CHRI, noted that the RTI is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the 1992 Constitution and was recognised as a right by international conventions on human rights.
 She was optimistic that participants would be well informed to enable them to appreciate the need to seek information based on provisions in existing laws as well as advocate the need for the passage of an effective RTI Bill into law."	10	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"322"	2013-07-29	"By Cletus D Kuunifaa
I have said that access to information and transparency should be considered a vaccine for ensuring good governance and Ghana must gear up for this vaccine to ensure accountability and prevent corruption. Scholars have written papers probing the anticipated implementation challenges of the freedom-of-information (FOI) law in countries like Finland, Jamaica, Liberia, and South Africa among others and the lessons should be there for Ghana to learn to improve on its FOI bill. 
At this point, at what stage is the FOI bill in Parliament? Is it even currently at a deliberative stage? Who brings it up to the floor for deliberation? Or is it languishing somewhere on the shelves in Parliament? Ghanaians need to know, now! We need answers to these questions, right now!
Ghana has scored aces on a variety of issues on the continent, except for passing an FOI bill into law, which appears to be an anthill task and we are thus lagging behind on this.
In Ghana, the Right to Information (RTI) first reared its head in the Ghanaian public discourse since in 1999. By 2003, the government had already drafted the first RTI bill to operationalize the constitutional right to information under article 21(1) f of the 1992 constitution. This provision would suggest that Ghana has accepted, as a constitutional matter, the right to information enshrined in the constitutional document, and to all intents and purposes, the bill, when passed, will consolidate the rights of journalists and the public to access information from government officials and public institutions without hindrance. As I write now, there is no clue as to what stage the bill is and when it becomes law and that must be a source of concern for us Ghanaians.
Let me postulate here that: laws passed are not intended to be “paper tigers” and on account of that if Parliament is still working the nitty gritty of the bill for it to be a good and formidable law, kudos. Granted that being the case, Parliament would have been underscoring the point scholars have long stressed in recent studies to be that: simply having FOI legislation passed does not guarantee that access will be easier. In this sense, there would have been some justification for the delay in parliament, in my opinion, to study critically the facilitating and inhibiting factors of similar legislations to inform our own.
If, on the other hand, the bill is just languishing somewhere on the shelves in parliament and nothing is being done about it… that will be ludicrous as it will be an unacceptable situation and we demand to know at what stage the bill is now!
One standout feature of any FOI bill is the Proactive Disclosure clause/provision to make room for access to information even when request is not made. Of course, this underscores the assumption that information is a public property and maybe, just maybe, Parliament is unaware of the value of information as a human right. Indeed, I wonder if Parliament is cognizant of the reason why information is read into the guarantee of a human right which is spelled out in many of the international treaties and in national constitutions including our own.
If they do, question is: is parliament depriving us of our fundamental human right by not making the law operational? Ghanaians deserve to know at what stage is the FOI bill in Parliament? Apart from rumors monged and assumptions that Parliament wants the bill to cover the private sector, somebody must tell us what‘s going on about the bill, now!
Cletus D. Kuunifaa, Long Island University, LIU Post, New York. Can be contacted at dipnibe@yahoo.com or Follow him on twitter @ckuunifaa"	9	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"323"	2013-07-26	" President of the Ghana Journalists Association (GJA) Roland Affail Monney has called for an independent body to see to the implementation of the Right To Information Bill (RTI), if passed into law.
 According to him, the current provision which gives the Attorney General the powers to oversee implementation does not augur well for the public, for whom the law is meant.
 “We think that there is no fundamental difference between the Attorney General (AG) and government,” he said on TV3 on Friday, July 26, 2013.
 “So we are advocating for an independent commission to look at the implementation of the proposed law,” he stressed.
 He expressed concerns about the 90-day period within which a request for information will be granted, asking authorities to consider Nigeria’s example.
 “This duration should be looked at because Nigeria has a 7-day waiting period within which one can obtain information.”
 The Bill is before Parliament and already President John Mahama has given assurance that he will assent it immediately it is passed."	9	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"324"	2013-07-02	" The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) has entreated government, private bodies, legislature and individuals to dismiss the false impression that RTI law would encourage infringement on individual privacy and tamper with national security.
 CHRI said it was regrettable that since the introduction of the RTI Bill in Ghana, those misconceptions had been going round in some circles.
 “Whiles some believe that RTI law will promote the infringement of individual privacy due to its ability to grant access to all information, others believe that it will affect the work of the national security, benefit only the elite and serve as a catalyst for journalists to harass government officials,” CHRI added.
 Ms Antoinette Akoto-Bamfo, RTI Project Assistant of the CHRI, Africa Office, made the call in a statement signed and copied to the Ghana News Agency on Tuesday.
 CHRI said passage of RTI Bill into law would rather promote constitutional right of the citizenry to access information from Ministries, Departments and Agencies, thereby enhance transparency and accountability.
 It said providing access to official information was subject to exemptions that were necessary to protect public interest, and further entrench democratic principles required for national unity and integration.
 RTI law would set out clearly information that are for public consumption and those that are not, as well as give credence to the fact that though individuals have the right to information, it was limited to the protection of public interest and the rights of individual’s privacy, CHRI said.
 CHRI further quoted a study conducted by Dr Kwadwo Appiagyei- Atua, a Senior Lecturer at the Faculty of Law, University of Ghana, as saying that access to information was vital to the effective promotion of national security.
 Indeed, in some critical respects, national security might be enhanced by limiting access to certain vital information, but added “national security is, however, not fundamentally at odds with freedom of expression and information,” said CHRI.
 It called on Ghanaians to disregard the negative perceptions of RTI and focus on the fact that the law would “encourage accountability in government, promote good record keeping, reduce corruption, promote citizen participation in governance, bring about an open system where there is less mystery and also move Ghana to an enlightened society”."	9	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"325"	2013-06-16	" The Bureau for Internal Affairs, (BIA), a centre for information gathering, has hailed Cabinet’s approval for the passage of Right to Information (RTI) Bill, describing it as very propitious to boost good governance.
 The organisation said the passage of the RTI Bill would also facilitate rapid realisation of a sound national economic policy.
 A statement issued by Mr Mohammed Frimpong, Executive Secretary of BIA in Accra, expressed the need for Ghana to direct “governance by the will and knowledge of the people through information gathering and sharing, to encourage economic and social development on the dictate of the 1992 Constitution”.
 Cabinet has forwarded the RTI Bill to Parliament for consideration and its subsequent passage into law.
 The Bill seeks to promote greater transparency and accountability in the utilisation of state resources.
 The Bill has been on the drawing board for more than 10 years prompting agitations from civil society groups, the media and other stakeholders for it to be passed into law.
 Mr Frimpong said the government should encourage public participation in the performance of their constitutional duties instead of limiting such roles to state institutions and arms of government.
 As the wielders of the sovereignty of the nation, there is the need for the people to get a platform to relate directly or to be part of matters of governance and development.
 Mr Frimpong said BIA intends to provide the wheels for active participation of the populace in information gathering and sharing as it affects governance and national development.
 “To actualise participatory democracy as the cornerstone of the 1992 Constitution in pursuit of state policy of probity and accountability at this stage of our constitutional development, it behoves the populace to create information bureau in every nook and cranny of the society.
 “So far, the role of workers in information gathering and sharing in the constitutional dispensation leaves much to be desired by the prevalence of alleged corruption and wanton dissipation of public funds,” he said.
 Mr Frimpong said: “clearly any level of economic deprivation of the people is a serious setback to our onward march to higher national productivity”.
 He said it is not surprising that Ghana is experiencing national economic slowdown, culminating in sequence of low investment, low revenue and falling standard of living.
 BIA is an anti-corruption organisation and also serves as a centre for information gathering on public concerns with the aim of bridging the communication gap between the public and the authorities and the authorities on issues negatively affecting the nation."	9	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"326"	2013-06-03	" The Coalition on the Right To Information (RTI) has called on President John Dramani Mahama to ensure that the Bill is finally laid before parliament.
 The coalition, in a letter dated May 28, 2013, called on the president to ensure that “the RTI Bill is presented to the honorable house for consideration.”
 A statement copied to the Ghana News Agency on Monday and signed by Ms Esther Ahulu, RTI Project Officer, said.
 The statement urged President Mahama to honor his campaign promise of signing the RTI Bill immediately it was presented to the executive, for onward presentation to parliament for consideration.
 It said the Ghana RTI Bill has been going back and forth between respective governments over the past 10 years, till it was placed before parliament on February 5, 2010, but was later referred to the Parliamentary Joint Committees on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, for examination.
 The statement said the Bill is currently with cabinet in accordance with the standing orders of the parliament, which specifies that all bills pending before the last parliament be reverted to cabinet.
 It said the coalition is also proposing that before the executive returns the Bill to parliament, it must be reviewed taking into consideration the amendments made and accepted by the parliamentary Joint Committees of the last parliament.
 The Coalition on the RTI is a network of Civil Society Organisations working for the passage of a democratic RTI law that empowers the people’s right to information and enhances governmental accountability to citizens."	9	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"327"	2013-04-30	" The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI), Ghana, has expressed doubts about the feasibility of the new pension scheme to serve the mutual interest of workers due to inadequate information and challenges bedeviling it.
 “Numerous criticisms on the way the Pensions’ fund of the second tier was invested over the last year, tend to bring some uncertainty about the viability of the new Scheme”, the Coalition on RTI said.
 A statement signed by Ms Esther Ahulu, RTI Project Officer and copied to the Ghana News Agency on Wednesday to wish workers and organised labour a happy workers day.
 The Coalition said this year’s theme for the celebration, “Pensions: It is your Right and Responsibility” was appropriate and timely considering the challenges faced by the Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT).
 It noted that SSNIT every year complained about the lack of compliance by employers in the payment of employees’ contributions, but pension entitlement is the right of every qualified employee and the responsibility of every employer.
 The Coalition, however, said the issue was whether both employees and employers had adequate information about this right and responsibility, adding “As a result of inadequate information on pensions most workers do not know about their entitlements and claims”.
 The Coalition quoted Mr Sam Pee Yalley, Executive Secretary of the National Pensions Regulatory Authority as saying “…low scheme registration rate, lack of proper data on the scheme, unwanted and ill informed criticisms” were some of the challenges facing the new scheme introduced to enhance pensions.
 The statement noted it was on the basis of such issues that the Coalition have been fighting for the passage of an effective RTI law for the past ten years, to provide maximum disclosure of information to citizens.
 The Coalition said RTI was the touchstone for all other fundamental human rights and; therefore, there was the need for workers to be well informed on their pensions’ rights and responsibilities in order to hold their employers, including Government accountable.
 “The need for citizens to know will not only enlighten them but will also promote democracy and development”, the Coalition said.
 The Coalition, therefore, reiterated its call on the government to facilitate the passage of the RTI law, which it believes would positively affect all aspects of peoples’ life.
 Ghana’s RTI Bill was first drafted in 2002 and laid before Parliament in 2010 but has since not been passed into Law.
 Numerous activities had been conducted by the Coalition towards the passage of the Bill but to no avail.
 The President, Mr John Dramani Mahama on several occasions, had publicly proclaimed that he wanted the RTI Bill passed into law.
 However, according to the Standing Orders of Parliament, all un-passed bills before the House at the end of its term of office reverted to Cabinet to be re-submitted to the next Parliament.
 The term of the 6th Parliament of the 4th Republic of Ghana elapsed in January 2013.
 It is, therefore, the responsibility of Cabinet to expedite action on the process towards its passage by presenting it before the new Parliament.
 The Coalition is, therefore, urging the government to “walk the talk,” adding “We call on all organised labour and workers in general to add their voices, to call for the amendment and passage of the RTI Bill into law now”."	8	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"328"	2013-03-10	" The Central Regional Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI), has joined others calling on parliamentarians to fast track the passage of the RTI to ensure transparency and accountability in public affairs.
 The group noted that access to information was a fundamental human right guaranteed under the 1992 constitution, which gives all persons living in Ghana freedom to access information in the custody of public bodies and categories of private bodies.
 These were contained in a communiqué, issued and signed by Mrs Baaba Brew Fleischer, Central Regional RTI Coordinator at the weekend.
 It was issued at the end of a focus group discussion organized by the Coalition for stakeholders to educate and help them advocate the passage of the Bill.
 The meeting, which was attended by the media, women’s group, regional association of teachers, religious leaders and assembly members in Cape Coast, also called for a review of exemptions in the RTI Bill to bring it in line with international best practices.
 “The Ghana Right to Information Bill 2010 put the Bill before Parliament on February 5, 2010 and the Bill was referred to the parliamentary select joint committee on communications and constitutional, legal and parliamentary affairs for examination”, the Communiqué stated.
 It therefore posed some questions such as ‘where is the RTI? What is keeping the RTI from being passed? Do our law makers really want us to know?
 The Coalition commended the efforts of the joint committee in ensuring public engagement and exchange of ideas on the Bill and emphasized that a good bill was more desirable than a rushed and ‘mutilated’ one passed into law that serves to hinder the public’s right to know.
 Mrs Fleischer said it was therefore necessary to take into account the views of the public and civil society to ensure Ghana’s RTI law meets international norms and standards, serves the aspirations of the Ghanaian society as clearly written in Ghana’s Constitution."	7	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"329"	2013-02-12	" The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), Africa Regional Office, on Tuesday called on the Parliamentary Joint Committee working on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill to expedite action on the bill.
 The RTI Bill has been going back and forth from one government to the other over the past 10 years, and it is time for Members of Parliament to connect it to the daily lives of the electorate they represent and their right to development.
 Ms Mina Mensah, CHRI Africa Regional Coordinator told the Ghana News Agency in an interview that the a right to information law is a key element to development since it enables citizens to access information held by Government bodies, be it information on social, economic or political rights and, as a result, promote transparency and accountability.
 “An access to information law promotes development because citizens are able to access and make good use of government intervention programmes, as well as hold government accountable for its actions.
 “Every individual has the freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of all kind, subject to such limitations as may be imposed by law and are necessary in a free and democratic society.
 “Therefore, it is vital that a law is put in place that will streamline which information is available, how it is available, from whom and where,” Ms Mensah stated.
 She noted that the law should aim at easing, rather than restricting, access to information and that the Ghana Right to Information Bill, 2010 seeks to serve this purpose.
 Article 1(1) of Ghana’s 1992 Constitution states that, ‘the sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of Ghana in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of government are to be exercised.
 This principle is affirmed by article 21(1) (f) of the same Constitution which guarantees every person the right to information as a fundamental human right, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.
 Ms Mensah, therefore, urged the Parliamentary Committee to make use of its regional consultations reports to amend the bill to a level that would match international best practices and human right standards.
 She said the current form of the bill did not meet international standards therefore the Select Joint Committee on Communications and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs must speed up efforts to get the bill in tune with international standards.
 She said upon request by the committee for technical advice, the RTI Coalition Ghana developed a Draft involving specific amendments on those issues for its consideration.
 Ms Mensah said the RTI Bill was first laid before Parliament on February 5, 2010, but it was only in July-August 2011 that the Joint Committee held its regional consultations to collect the views of the Ghanaian public on the Bill.
 “It is significant to note that to date the Joint Committee has been unable to produce a report on its regional consultations and this is holding back the processes leading to the passage of the Bill into law,” she said.
 Ms Mensah added that despite several requests by the Coalition to the Joint Committee to inform it of their findings on the regional consultations or the Zero Draft, no documents had been provided.
 \"During the regional tours, people raised issues during the collation of the information, the bill has to be amended, its current form does not meet international standard”.
 She said the coalition would, however, not be daunted by delay of the joint committee to engage both new and old members of parliament and the grassroots to appreciate the relevance of the bill passing into law."	7	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"330"	2012-10-13	" A concerned group have reminded Members of Parliament that further delay in the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) bill could be a betrayal of public trust in the institution of Parliament.
 The group, including journalists, assembly members, public servants and opinion leaders, called on the leadership of Parliament to honour their recent promise to ensure the passage of the RTI bill in conformity with the best practices in the world before Parliament rises.
 This was contained in a communiqué issued by the group after a focus group discussion on the RTI, organized by the Eastern Regional Coalition on the Right to Information in Koforidua.
 The communiqué regretted that, despite the pronouncement of the Presidential candidates of the various political parties of their determination to fight corruption, entrench the democracy of the country and run an open government to ensure the total development of the country, none of them apart from President John Dramani Mahama had spoken about the passage of the bill into law to empower the citizens to take their destiny into their own hands and contribute positively to the development of the country.
 The group challenged the presidential candidates to demonstrate their promise of good governance by motivating their Parliamentarians to fight for the passage of the RTI with the various amendments needed to make it a good law.
 The group expressed its appreciation to President Mahama for his promise to ensure the passage of the RTI bill saying being the leader of a party in government with majority in Parliament he could do more to ensure the passage of the bill with all the needed amendments.
 The communiqué appealed to the Ghana Journalists Association to make the passage of the RTI Bill a major political issue on its election platform.
 It called on other Civil Society Groups to join the campaign for the passage of the RTI."	5	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"331"	2012-10-08	" The Eastern Regional Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) has demanded that in furtherance of the ‘’better Ghana’’ agenda, the RTI law should be passed to demonstrate government’s commitment to tackling corruption.
 The group appealed to government to ensure that Parliament considers amendments proposed by the Coalition, in passing the bill into law, so that it could become a useful document.
 Members of the Coalition and representatives of some civil society organisations were discussing proposed amendments to the bill, in Koforidua. The participants said that the passage of the RTI bill into law was long overdue, and Parliament had no excuse to end its term without passing it into the law.
 They said that it had been proved throughout the world that RTI was a surest way of fighting corruption, since it makes information available and enhances transparency.
 They said if the government claim to be fighting corruption; it must be interested in the passage of the bill into law.
 The participants challenged political parties to show commitment to the passage of the bill in their campaign messages, and journalists to ask political parties about their determination to have the bill passed into law.
 Mrs. Mina Mensah, a member of the RTI Coalition, said the bill contained unworkable provisions and asked it Parliament to amend it in the interest of the country. Mr. Edmund Quaynor, Eastern Regional Coordinator of the RTI Coalition, said research had proved that in countries where the RTI existed, the media was the least to have used it and that it was students and researchers who had used it most.
 He asked the public to disabuse their minds that journalists would be too empowered by the passage of the RTI."	5	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"332"	2012-09-28	" Mr. Ebo Barton Odro, Member of Parliament (MP) for Cape Coast, on Friday called on media personnel to join in the crusade for peaceful election in December and advised them to guard against inciting violence on the air waves.
 He accused some media houses of ‘fanning fire’ by allowing some politicians to go overboard, particularly on air and sometimes in the print media, a situation he noted could raise the political temperature of the country.
 Mr. Odro made the call when he addressed about 80 members of the Central Regional branch of the “Right to Information Coalition” to mark this year’s Right to Information (RTI) Day, urging politicians to be tolerant and listen to constructive criticism.
 The group went on a route march through the principal streets of Cape Coast, holding placards with writings such as, “Where is the RTI Bill?,” \"Politicians, don’t take Ghanaians for granted,” \"Right to Information is not a threat to national security,” “RTI Law is as urgent as the creation of 45 constituencies,” and “Information denied, threatens our democracy”.
 Mr. Odro urged the Coalition to be patient because Parliament was working assiduously towards getting the RTI Bill passed and assured them that all their concerns would be addressed as soon as possible.
 He tasked government and other institutions to ensure proper record keeping in their archives since many of them lacked it and this could hinder people from getting the needed information.
 He said when the bill becomes law, people who would be denied information could go to court for judicial review to determine whether the information should be given out or not.
 The MP took the opportunity to advise the youth not to allow themselves to be swayed into violent acts since they had a lot of talents and wisdom which should rather be developed positively to enable them to grow into great future leaders.
 Mrs Baaba Brew Fleischer, Central Regional Coordinator of the Coalition, said they were using the occasion to create public awareness about the RTI Bill for the public to appreciate what it entailed.
 She appealed to Parliament to expedite its passage as soon as possible."	5	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"333"	2012-07-05	" The Brong-Ahafo Network of Non-Governmental Organisation (BANGO), on Thursday expressed worry about the inactiveness of the Parliamentary Select Committee on the Right to Information Bill (RTI) towards the passage of the bill.
 The Network, at a sensitization workshop in Sunyani expressed disappointment about the work of the committee, chaired by Mr. Twumasi Appiah, Member of Parliament (MP) for Sene and entreated other MPs in the region to contribute to the passage of the bill.
 Mr. Gbiel Gabriel Benarkuu, Regional Chairman of BANGO, emphasized that the delay and failure as well as the unwillingness of the committee to expedite action on the passage of the bill was not the best.
 More than 51 members of the network attended the workshop, which was aimed at updating participants on the current state of the bill and the unnecessary delays of the committee.
 Mr. Benarkuu, who is the Regional Coordinator of the Right to Information Coalition stated: “There is no need for the committee to fear because the bill when passed will not target public office holders alone as it will rather seek to help deepen the country’s democratic systems”.
 He noted that the delays in the passage of the bill was an indication that the perceived corruption within the legislature was true and called on the committee to work hard to prove skeptics wrong about this perception.
 Mr. Benarkuu emphasized that Ghana was not the only country that was yearning for the passage of the RTI bill and cited Nigeria, Liberia India and other developing countries that had passed similar bills.
 The bill, when passed, will show that Ghana is actually the gateway to Africa and will also attest that the country is seriously yearning to reach the middle income bracket and achieve specific targets in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), he added.
 Mr. Benarkuu commended Civil Society Organisations and all state actors for their contributions to the current state of the bill and asked Parliament to be more proactive and pass the bill for the supreme interest of all Ghanaians.**"	3	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"334"	2012-06-19	" Participants at a National Stakeholders Conference on Right to Information (RTI) on Wednesday intensified pressure on Parliament to pass the Bill into Law to serve as an example to spur other African countries to emulate.
 “The passage of a strong right to information law by Ghana, considered as beacon of African democracy, will motivate other governments to initiate the processes for passing such laws in their respective countries.
 “Ghana has no justification to further delay the passage of the Bill as a pace setter, other African countries are keenly watching the processes…in fact it’s now becoming embarrassing for Ghana on the continent as a torch bearer not to have passed the RTI Bill as at 2012,” Mr. Patrick Tumwine, Ugandan Human Rights Advocates stated in Accra.
 Mr. Tumwine, who is RTI Programme Manager for Human Rights Network of Uganda (HURINET), was speaking at a day’s workshop organised by Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA) in collaboration with Ghana Right to Information Coalition and Africa Freedom of Information Centre (AFIC).
 The RTI workshop was to highlight the Coalition’s proposed amendments and seek the support of government, political parties, civil society organisations as well as the general public, for the adoption of the proposals by Parliament.
 Mr. Tumwine revealed that Uganda took three years to pass the RTI Bill but took five years to pass a Legislative Instrument on the Law, “I can’t understand why the process is taking ages in Ghana, which we all look up in terms of strengthening democratic pillars”.
 In a communique issued at the end of the workshop, the participants acknowledged that political commitment to the right of access to information was necessary for the adoption, full implementation and enforcement of access to information legislation in Ghana.
 In addition, it was recognized that the passage of RTI Bill into law was just the first step in the process; more challenging would be the process of implementation to ensure that openness, transparency and ready access to information.
 The communique stated that for RTI to become fully integrated and internalised in Ghanaian political and public service culture; Government and Parliament must ensure that sufficient logistical and material resources were provided for the implementation of the Law.
 Consequently, the participants recommended that the Parliamentary Select Joint Committee took urgent steps to finalise the “RTI Zero Draft,” and make the necessary amendments to the Bill and present its report to Parliament.
 Parliament should endorse the amendment to the Bill and pass the RTI Bill before their tenure of office ended on January 7, 2013.
 “While we commend efforts of the Joint Committee in ensuring public engagement and exchange of ideas on the Bill, we must emphasise that a good bill is more desirable than a rushed and mutilated bill passed into Law.
 “It is necessary to generate the active involvement of the public as well as civil society organisations, to ensure that our RTI law meets international standards,” the communiqué stated.
 The 1992 Constitution recognises the right of access to information as a fundamental right for Ghanaian citizens.
 The Ghana Right to Information Bill, 2010, therefore seeks to provide for the implementation of the right of access to information as guaranteed under Article 21(1) (f) of the Constitution.
 The Bill was tabled before Parliament on February 5, 2010. It was subsequently referred to the Parliamentary Select Joint Committees on Communications; and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny.
 The Joint Committee held a review meeting on public consultations and decided that certain concerns raised by the Coalition and the general public on the content of the Bill during the nation-wide consultations needed to be revisited and amended to bring the Bill into conformity with international human rights standards and best practices on the right to information.
 The Ghana Right to Information coalition prepared and submitted a “Zero Draft,” addressing the specific issues identified by the joint committee.
 Participants were from Ghana, South Africa, Nigeria, Uganda, and Mexico who used the platform to share experiences.**"	3	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"335"	2012-06-13	" The Enfoworld Ghana, a Non-Governmental Organisation, in collaboration with the Muslim dialogue and Humanitarian organisations have called on the Government to expedite action in passing the Right to Information (RTI) bill currently before Parliament.
 Alhaji Alhassan Abdulai, Executive Director of Enfoworld Ghana, said the bill when passed would give the public access to the whole range of government policies, decisions and activities needed to be well informed to meaningfully participate in the political and decision-making process.
 Alhaji Abdulai made the call on Wednesday at a press encounter with representatives of the Muslim bodies on the current state of the RTI bill in Accra.
 He noted that the bill was drafted in the early 2000s and has now been pass on from Cabinet to Parliament for consideration and passage; but as at now, nothing substantial has been done to pass the bill into a working document.
 Alhaji Abdulai said it is as a result of the importance of the bill that some anti-corruption groups such as the Ghana Integrity Initiative, Trade Union Congress and the Ghana Journalists Association came together to form the RTI coalition in 2003.
 He said the National Chief Imam is one of the patrons together with some religious and traditional leaders, adding that the Muslim fraternity had engaged the regional and districts branches to sensitise them on the importance of the bill.
 Alhaji Abdulai stressed that Parliament through its leadership has promised to pass the bill by the end of its present life and therefore called on stakeholders to educate the masses in their sermons and meetings to have a deeper understanding of the bill.
 He noted that Ghana is not the only country fighting to have the bill passed, as Nigeria and other African countries have passed such bills into law and stressing that studies shows that countries where there is RTI law, corruption is low.
 Mr. Khuzaimah Mohammed, special aide at the Office of the National Chief Imam, said after Ghana had gain independence in 1957 and became a republic in 1960, the issue of accountability and transparency has been a matter of concern to the public.
 Mr. Mohammed said passing the bill into law, the independence of the country would be enhanced for all to take part in financial and operational probes in the fight against corruption.
 He added that the bill when passed would respect the individual’s right to access information concerning the governance of their affairs in areas like food, shelter, health, clean water, education and the distribution of the resources.**"	3	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"336"	2012-06-11	" The Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA) is organizing a National Stakeholders’ Conference on the Right to Information (RTI) in Accra.
 The Conference scheduled for June 20, will highlight the Ghana RTI Coalition’s proposed amendments and seek the support of government, political parties, civil society organizations as well as the general public, for the adoption of the proposals by Parliament.
 This was contained in a statement jointly signed by Professor Kwame Karikari, Executive Director and Mrs Ugonna Ukaigwe, Programme Officer; Media Law Reform and Legal Defence, both of the MFWA.
 Article 21(1) (f) of the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana guarantees every person the right to information as a fundamental human right, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.
 However, Ghana is yet to put in place the legal framework that will enable citizens to fully enjoy this fundamental right by passing an access to information law.
 The statement said \"Even though a bill is currently before Parliament, concerns have been raised by the Ghana RTI Coalition on the quality of the bill vis-a-vis international best practices on RTI legislation.\"
 \"The Coalition subsequently prepared a draft on the RTI bill and made proposals for improving the content of the bill to the Joint Committee of Parliament. In March, 2012, the Joint Committee held a review meeting and concluded that the recommendations by the Coalition needed to be looked at so as to improve the bill. Parliament is yet to conclude on the Coalition’s proposals.\"
 The MFWA is a regional independent, non-profit, non-governmental organization that works to defend and promote the rights and freedom of the media and all forms of expression.
 It is a member of the Ghana Right to Information Coalition.**"	3	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"337"	2012-05-21	" The Coalition on Right to Information (RTI) on Tuesday denied allegations it was delaying the RTI legislative process stressing that, ample evidence proved otherwise.
 Nana Oye Lithur, Convener of the Coalition on RTI, who made the denial at a press conference in Accra, said the Coalition had consistently provided technical and additional support to Parliament and relevant stakeholders throughout the RTI’s Bill legislative process.
 She said the Majority Leader in Parliament, Cletus Avoka at a press conference on May 16, 2012, said the RTI Coalition was part of the problem for the delay in passing the Bill because it had delayed in submitting its proposals for a review of the relevant clauses in the Bill, adding that, it had partly grounded the work of Parliament.
 Nana Oye added that on May 7, 2012, Mr. Avoka said on a radio station that passage of the RTI Bill was not a priority for Parliament but that the Petroleum Revenue and Commission Bills were more of a priority.
 She described the statements and accusation as regrettable.
 Recounting some activities undertaken by the Coalition to educate the public and to assist government institutions and parliamentarians on the passage of the bill, Nana Oye said “Since the process begun in 2003, the Coalition has supported it at the Attorney General‘s Department and when it was submitted to Cabinet for consideration and adoption and subsequently to Parliament. It has also supported the processes at the Joint Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs level.”
 She said the Coalition submitted a detailed memorandum on the Bill to Parliament in April 2010, and followed this with the distribution of 230 copies of the Coalition’s publication containing a clause by clause commentary on the RTI Bill to all Members of Parliament in April 2010.
 Nana Oye said the Coalition had also distributed 230 leaflets of ‘Why you need the RTI Bill’ and other RTI literature materials to Parliament to further enhance their appreciation on the Bill.
 “Apart from resource materials on RTI, the Coalition has had several engagements with Parliament since the Bill was laid in March 2010. The Coalition held a workshop with 32 members of the Joint Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Bill on June 9, 2010 at the Kofi Annan Centre.
 It has held series of breakfast and roundtable discussions with the Subsidiary Legislative Committee, the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, the Parliamentary Committee on Poverty Reduction and the Public Accounts Committee,” she said.
 Nana Oye stated that the Coalition had had one-on-one engagements and lobby meetings with members of Parliament, some of whom included Mr. Avoka, Mr. Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu, Minority Leader, Professor Mike Ocquaye, Second Deputy Speaker, Dr. Annan, Mr. Maxwell Kofi Jumah, Ahmed Ibrahim, Muntaka Mubarak, Kwame Osei Prempeh and Abubakar Sumani.
 She said the Coalition had been able to reach out to all the 230 members of Ghana’s Parliament through the distribution of its RTI educational materials and had had personal interaction with 105 members of Parliament on the Right to Information Bill through the Coalition’s advocacy activities.
 Nana Oye said on March 17, 2012, the Coalition, with the support of the World Bank, facilitated a Parliamentary meeting on the regional consultations.
 “Subsequently, the Coalition has prepared and forwarded an expert opinion on the Bill to the World Bank on May 7, 2012. Copies of the expert opinion with the World Bank’s authorisation were forwarded to Parliament on May 21, 2012, and made available to the Majority and Minority leaders, and members of the Joint Committee,” she added.
 Nana Oye gave the assurance that the Coalition was committed to support the legislative making process.
 “While we are committed to seeing the passage of the Bill without any further delay, we are not simply interested in passing any Bill into law. Equally important for us is the need to pass into law, a bill that meets international standards and best practices, and enhances transparency, accountability and open government,” she added.
 Nana Oye said the Coalition remained ready to offer its full support, adding that, it would cooperate with Parliament to ensure that the RTI was passed before the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of Ghana lapses on January 7, 2013.
 “We urge the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to, without any further delays, expedite action on its Report for submission to the House for consideration and adoption,” she said.
 Nana Oye described the effective RTI legislation as having the potential to entrench democracy, transparency and accountability and promote development.
 Mr. Akoto Ampaw, a legal practitioner and a member of the Coalition, said the provision of maximum disclosure in the Bill was undermined by factors such as type of exemptions, unduly long timelines for disclosure, cumbersome and rather expensive fee regime, non-accessible review or appeals mechanism and a lack of coverage of certain categories of private bodies.
 He said the Coalition had tabled their concerns and suggestions before Parliament to enable them to pass into law a legislation that met not only international human rights standards, but also one that was in harmony with the provisions in the 1992 Constitution.
 Prof Kwame Karikari, Executive Director of Media Foundation for West Africa, said Ghana needed to learn from shining examples of countries within the sub-region that had successfully implemented the RTI.
 He said the countries included Nigeria, Tanzania and Liberia.**"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"338"	2012-05-21	" Ghana Aid Effectiveness Forum (GAEF), a civil society advocacy group on Tuesday expressed reservation about delay in passing the Right to Information Bill by Parliament.
 In a statement to the Ghana News Agency in Accra, GAEF reminded the law makers that, RTI is essential for enhancing the ability of citizens to engage with government on policy issues.
 GAEF therefore questioned why the Bill is still languishing in Parliament after two long years?
 “The RTI Bill is about making basic information on government activities available to citizens. Holding government accountable is impossible without access to information, and the capacity to ask relevant questions.”
 “Currently, inadequate access to information on government activities prohibits effective citizen-government dialogue on policies and programmes,” GAEF stated.
 The statement said Ghanaians have to turn to international agency reports to find out what the Ghana government is using the country’s resources for....”this is unacceptable”.
 According to GAEF, the latest UN Africa Human Development Report (2012) shows that, in the years 2000 – 2008, Ghana spent more on defense than on research for agricultural development.
 This raises questions as to how development priorities are set and to what extent citizens are involved.
 The public needs information not only to facilitate monitoring and oversight, but also to engage effectively with government, share ideas and knowledge about ground realities, promote civic participation in governance.
 The passage of the Right to Information Bill is therefore critical in achieving participatory development.
 The GAEF therefore joined other civil society groups including the Coalition on Right to Information, to remind parliament of “Their commitment to uphold Articles 1 and 21 of the 1992 constitution which together put the RTI law within the ambit of a right”.
 GAEF appealed to parliament to approve a RTI law that conforms with international best practices immediately.**"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"339"	2012-05-17	" The Upper East Regional branch of the Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill has called on Parliament to as a matter of urgency expedite action on the passage of the bill that has been laid before it.
 The Coalition made the call on Thursday in a communiqué issued at a round table discussion in Bolgatanga, and signed by the Acting Focal Person, Norbert Atia Atanga.
 The meeting brought together Civil Society Organizations, the Media and other well meaning natives in the Region. It was to help participants discuss the concerns on the Right to Information Bill.
 The communiqué stressed that, the absence of a specific law to enforce the right to information as enshrined in the 1992 constitution under article 21 clause 1 (f), significantly undermined the enjoyment of this fundamental human right by the people of Ghana.
 It said its passage had been long overdue and therefore called on Parliament to use this time around as it resumed office to pass the bill into law to help consolidate the country’s democracy.
 ”The Coalition believes that if an effective law is passed, it will go a long way to consolidate the country’s democracy by promoting dialogue and mutual understanding, and facilitate development by enabling all and sundry to participate in planning, monitoring and implementation of the development process.”
 It further entreated the Joint Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, to come up with their report on the Regional Consultations conducted last year and submit it to the House for further deliberations on the RTI Bill.
 The Coalition among other issues reiterated the need to include the chieftaincy institution as a public body which the current bill had excluded.
 ” The current provision on the exclusion of the chieftaincy institution as a public body contravenes Article 36 (8) of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana, which states that chieftaincies exercise their functions on behalf of the public. The coalition appeals to the government to reconsider the current state of clause 65 of the bill referencing to ‘government agencies’, which includes a Ministry, a government department, District Assembly or a local authority, a statutory or any other body corporate or incorporated, or a public office. This provision contravenes Article 36 (8) of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana, which states that chieftaincies exercise their functions on behalf of the public.”
 The communiqué entreated government to include among other issues a penalty provision in the bill because the current state of the Bill failed to answer the question as to what would happen if the custodian denied information to an applicant or deliberately provide wrong information.
 ”It does not contain any penalties for custodians who willfully obstruct the flow of information. The bill failed to provide for a speedy release of information in cases relating to life and liberty. All these among other issues not raised here make the Bill to fall below international standard”.
 The Communiqué indicated that Ghanaians would not forgive President Mills and Vice President Mahama if they failed to honour the promise made to them by expediting action to get the RTI Bill passed into law as a pre-requisite for good governance, respect for human rights and the rule of law.**"	2	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"340"	2012-05-15	" Mr Cletus Apul Avoka, the Majority Leader on Wednesday denied stories in some section of the media that the Right to Information Bill currently before Parliament was not the priority of Parliament.
 The Majority Leader stated at a press conference at Parliament House that, the Bill had gone through a number of processes and was now before a joint Committee of Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Communication.
 He said Parliament and for that matter Members of Parliament considered any attempt to develop and strengthen the country’s democratic development including the RTI as very important.
 His denial followed a press statement by Civil Society Organisation issued and signed by Mr. Mahama Zakaria, the Northern  Regional Coordinator of the RTI, that said  \"the Coalition is calling on the leadership of Parliament to make the RTI bill part of its agenda for its next sitting which is expected to start in May 2012.”
 The statement alleged that the Majority Leader had said the Bill was not of importance to Parliament that was why it had been delayed.
 Mr. Avoka said, in 2010-2011 the Joint Committee collated public views from Takoradi, Koforidua, Kumasi and Accra on the bill, adding that there was the need to take time to do the right thing than to rush to pass it which might in the end be an exercise in futility.**"	2	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"341"	2012-04-30	" The Northern Regional Chapter of the Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) has expressed disappointment at parliament for its inability to pass the Right to Information bill which has been pending in the House for about a decade now.
 It noted that “Parliamentarians are either adopting this lukewarm attitude towards the bill for their parochial political interest to continue running away from accountability and transparency or for reasons best known to them”.
 The Coalition also demanded to know from the Joint Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the report on the Regional Consultations which were held in six selected regions last year, saying “It is very necessary the Joint Committee makes its report available to the House and the general public”.
 These were contained in a press release issued in Tamale and signed by Mr. Mahama Zakaria, Northern Regional Coordinator of the RTI who stressed that \"The Coalition is calling on the leadership of parliament to make the RTI bill part of its agenda for its next sitting which is expected to start in May 2012.
 “We consider this very necessary because the bill which was drafted in 2002, has been sitting on the shelves of law makers for ten years now and needs the necessary attention”, the statement said.
 The Coalition also reminded the Government of its manifesto promise to the people of Ghana during the 2008 elections that it would ensure the passage of the bill when voted to power, adding “Government should note that election 2012 is just around the corner and that their manifesto promise is yet to see the light of day”.
 It called on all the political parties to demonstrate their commitment to the passage of the bill and urged all civil society groups, the media and the public to lead a crusade towards the passage of the bill to ensure more transparency, accountability and good governance for the development of the country.
 Meanwhile, when the GNA spoke to some journalists in the Northern Region about the bill, they equally expressed disappointment with the law makers and the executive for failing to push through the Right to Information bill, alleging that the politicians were probably doing this just to continue luring Ghanaians in dubious administrative transactions.
 Mr. Francis Npong of the Enquirer Newspaper, said if the Government actually believed in a free, fair and transparent democratic state, then the bill must be passed to enable ordinary citizens to have access to the needed information.
 He said the passage had delayed because the bill was not in the interest of the politicians, noting that \"several bills that came after the RTI bill had been passed, yet this bill is still waiting…what is the NMC and the GJA doing to push for the passage of the bill which is to enhance the work of journalists?\".**"	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"342"	2011-10-01	" A GNA feature by Nana Kodjo Jehu-Appiah
 Accra, Sept. 30, GNA - It was all about buoyancy when human rights activists including journalists and civil society organisations, prompted government about the essence of the Right to Information Bill (RTI), to boost the national fervour to facilitate probity and accountability. As the years roll by optimism is being downgraded into pessimism, and people who once believed that the passion for Government to improve on information flow to make probity and accountability possible are shaking their heads in disbelieve.
 All hope is not lost though; some human rights loyalist can still see some dim light at the end of the long tunnel and so on Wednesday, September 28, the activists used a symposium to mark the 9th International Right to Know Day in Accra to renew their call to the Legislative Wing of Government (Parliament) to expedite action on the passage of the RTI. The argument was so simple but forcefully clear. 93The Bill had excee= ded its stay in Parliament.\"
 The blame was laid at the footstep of politicians who lack the commitment and perhaps are entertaining some unreasonable phobia that the law would be used against them. That is not all; there is also lack of effective pressure from the public and mass media on Parliament and the Executive to accelerate the process.
 The enactment of the RTI Law would ensure openness, effectiveness, accountability, as well as individual's right to access government-held information on various issues including how the taxpayers' monies are bei= ng spent. The Day celebrated on the theme: 93Information as the Key to Development; Your Right to know,\" is commemorated by information activist= s worldwide on September 28 each year. It encourages information awareness through the celebration as well as challenging the barriers to accessibility by opening up the discussion of corruption and dysfunction within the realm of information dissemination. The Day in Ghana is being observed under the joint collaboration of Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI), Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) and Ghana National Education Campaign Coalition (GNECC). Mr Akoto Ampaw, Human Rights Lawyer and Member of RTI Coalition said the current inaction on the passage of the Bill, called for expanded education on its advantages at the grassroots level.
 He however commended the consultations on the RTI Bill conducted by th= e Joint Committee on Communications and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs between July and August this year. Mr Akoto Ampaw noted that it was an indication of Parliament's readiness to take the Bill further for a second reading. He urged members of the Joint Committee to hasten their report and be informed by the views expressed by the public during the consultations for informed discussions on the floor of the House when Parliament convened in October.
 \"More importantly we call upon Members of Parliament to seriously debat= e the Bill in the light of international human rights standards and best practices on access to information based on views gathered from the stakeholders who participated in the consultations,\" he said. Mr Akoto Ampaw enumerated some concerns raised by the Coalition including the time lines, exemptions, fee paying regime, advance deposit fo= r information, lobbying of large businesses and Supreme Court appeal. He said these challenges might pose a number of problems to access to information, provide the opportunity for abuse of power and prevent others from benefiting in terms of affordability of fees. He suggested the institution of an independent committee to replace th= e Supreme Court appeal and an implementation deadline that impose implementation on institutions.
 Mr Akoto Ampaw cautioned that care must be taken not to pass an RTI La= w for its sake, but to pass a legislation that would actually promote the realisation of the right to information for all persons in Ghana. Mr Leslie Tetteh, National Co-ordinator of GNECC, explained the critical role of information to the development of education in the country= .. He stressed that lack of information at both the district and communit= y levels in the country on disbursement of educational resources often led to gaps and delays in the distribution process, causing poor turn-out of students.
 Mr Tetteh complained about lack of knowledge of basic educational policies at the district and community levels and advocated the strengthening of record systems at these levels and the translation of basi= c educational policies into some local languages for easy access, understanding and more effective education. Mr Affail Monney, Vice President of the Ghana Journalists Association, pledged the Association's support for the fight for the RTI, and stressed that it is time the media put pressure and play a leading role in advocatin= g the passage of the Bill into Law.
 He noted that though it is not a solely media specific law, the media would benefit because it would grant them the power to demand for information to keep government on it toes. Although it was unfortunate that the organisers of the symposium did not invite any member of the Executive or the leadership of Parliament, to explain the apparent inertia about the passage of the RTI Bill, all hope is definitely not lost and surely there will be light at the end of the tunnel= .. Further delay however will be dangerous and anachronistic to the good course."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"343"	2011-09-29	"A GNA feature by Nana Kodjo Jehu-Appiah
Accra, Sept. 30, GNA - It was all about buoyancy when human rights activists including journalists and civil society organisations, prompted government about the essence of the Right to Information Bill (RTI), to boost the national fervour to facilitate probity and accountability. As the years roll by optimism is being downgraded into pessimism, and people who once believed that the passion for Government to improve on information flow to make probity and accountability possible are shaking their heads in disbelieve.
All hope is not lost though; some human rights loyalist can still see some dim light at the end of the long tunnel and so on Wednesday, September 28, the activists used a symposium to mark the 9th International Right to Know Day in Accra to renew their call to the Legislative Wing of Government (Parliament) to expedite action on the passage of the RTI. The argument was so simple but forcefully clear. 93The Bill had excee= ded its stay in Parliament.\"
The blame was laid at the footstep of politicians who lack the commitment and perhaps are entertaining some unreasonable phobia that the law would be used against them.
That is not all; there is also lack of effective pressure from the public and mass media on Parliament and the Executive to accelerate the process.
The enactment of the RTI Law would ensure openness, effectiveness, accountability, as well as individual's right to access government-held information on various issues including how the taxpayers' monies are bei= ng spent. The Day celebrated on the theme: 93Information as the Key to Development; Your Right to know,\" is commemorated by information activist= s worldwide on September 28 each year.
It encourages information awareness through the celebration as well as challenging the barriers to accessibility by opening up the discussion of corruption and dysfunction within the realm of information dissemination. The Day in Ghana is being observed under the joint collaboration of Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI), Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) and Ghana National Education Campaign Coalition (GNECC). Mr Akoto Ampaw, Human Rights Lawyer and Member of RTI Coalition said the current inaction on the passage of the Bill, called for expanded education on its advantages at the grassroots level. He however commended the consultations on the RTI Bill conducted by th= e Joint Committee on Communications and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs between July and August this year. Mr Akoto Ampaw noted that it was an indication of Parliament's readiness to take the Bill further for a second reading. He urged members of the Joint Committee to hasten their report and be informed by the views expressed by the public during the consultations for informed discussions on the floor of the House when Parliament convened in October.
\"More importantly we call upon Members of Parliament to seriously debat= e the Bill in the light of international human rights standards and best practices on access to information based on views gathered from the stakeholders who participated in the consultations,\" he said.
Mr Akoto Ampaw enumerated some concerns raised by the Coalition including the time lines, exemptions, fee paying regime, advance deposit fo= r information, lobbying of large businesses and Supreme Court appeal. He said these challenges might pose a number of problems to access to information, provide the opportunity for abuse of power and prevent others from benefiting in terms of affordability of fees.
He suggested the institution of an independent committee to replace th= e Supreme Court appeal and an implementation deadline that impose implementation on institutions.
Mr Akoto Ampaw cautioned that care must be taken not to pass an RTI La= w for its sake, but to pass a legislation that would actually promote the realisation of the right to information for all persons in Ghana.
Mr Leslie Tetteh, National Co-ordinator of GNECC, explained the critical role of information to the development of education in the country= .. He stressed that lack of information at both the district and communit= y levels in the country on disbursement of educational resources often led to gaps and delays in the distribution process, causing poor turn-out of students.
Mr Tetteh complaine d about lack of knowledge of basic educational policies at the district and community levels and advocated the strengthening of record systems at these levels and the translation of basi= c educational policies into some local languages for easy access, understanding and more effective education. Mr Affail Monney, Vice President of the Ghana Journalists Association, pledged the Association's support for the fight for the RTI, and stressed that it is time the media put pressure and play a leading role in advocatin= g the passage of the Bill into Law.
He noted that though it is not a solely media specific law, the media would benefit because it would grant them the power to demand for information to keep government on it toes. Although it was unfortunate that the organisers of the symposium did not invite any member of the Executive or the leadership of Parliament, to explain the apparent inertia about the passage of the RTI Bill, all hope is definitely not lost and surely there will be light at the end of the tunnel= .. Further delay however will be dangerous and anachronistic to the good course."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"344"	2011-09-05	" to include civil society organisations Accra, Sept. 6, GNA – The Convention Peoples’ Party (CPP) on Monday advocated the expansion of the provisions in the Right to Information Bill (RTI) to include Civil Society Organisations (CSO), which play vital role in the country’s governance machinery. “Section 64 of the RTI Bill should be expanded to make it obligatory for CSO and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO) whose activities underpin tenets of good governance, transparency and influencing democratic public opinion. “The citizens must have a right to access information about the operations of CSO and NGOs about their sources of finance, project intentions, and other vital information which will contribute to transparency and accountability,” Mr Bright O. Akwetey, CPP’s Shadow Cabinet Minister of Justice and Attorney General told the Ghana News Agency in an interview in Accra. The Former Chief State Attorney said: “The proliferation of CSO and NGOs whose leaderships have ascribed to themselves absolute public powers to criticise governments and other leaderships in the country but without any control mechanism must be check through the RTI. “As they claim to operate in the public interest, Ghanaians need to know their financiers, background and motives for being our advocates…as he or she that comes to equity must come with clean hands.” Whilst acknowledging the vital role that some CSOs and NGOs played in the country, Mr Akwetey cautioned that the developments in North Africa and other parts on the Continent calls to question full disclosure of information about CSOs. He therefore called on the joint Parliamentary Committee seeking public input to the draft bill to seriously consider expanding the said provisions to include CSO and NGOs. The CPP Leading Member noted that Ghana’s choice of democratic governance entailed an active participation by all in the governance of the country and the right to information was particularly relevant. He said: “It is only when those who are to participate in governance are well informed about democratic stakeholders and the entire democratic process that they can contribute meaningfully to the governance system.” Mr Akwetey therefore described the exclusion of CSOs and NGOs from the RTI Bill as a fundamental omission that must be ratified immediately. On the numerous exemptions in the Bill, Mr Akwetey noted that International RTI standards revealed that exemptions should be narrowly formulated so as not to defeat the purpose and object of access to information. He therefore recommended that; all exemptions in the Bill should be subjected to “a harms test”: That is to say, exemption from information will remain exemption where it was proved that the harm in disclosure was greater than the public interest in disclosure. Mr Akwetey said “This is vital to include as the Constitution specifically states that the right to information is ‘subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society’, hence the exemptions need to meet this standard”. He noted that one of the principles of the right to information was that information requested for or from a public body should be provided in a timely or expeditious manner. “This is in recognition of the fact that information is needed for a specific purpose within a specific time.” Mr Akwetey expressed concern about the times stipulated within the Bill, which according to him defeated this principle as well as the right to information. In addition, to these long time lines, applicants need to give a reason for the application when it is urgent, Clause 1 (4) in the Bill. “This is unreasonable considering that it is the duty of the government to avail information and one should not give a reason for exercising this right, “Mr Akwetey noted."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"345"	2011-08-10	" , Proposes Amendments
 Written by Francis Ameyibor
 Wednesday, August 10, 2011
 Ghanaian civil society activists through the RTI Coalition has faulted some provisions of the country’s Right to Information (RTI) Bill presently before Parliament and called for their amendment. The group in a statement in Accra said that a critical review of the bill reveals that while Clauses 2 and 3 provide for proactive disclosure, the information that should be proactively disclosed is rather limited.
 According to the coalition in a statement jointly signed by Ms Caroline Nalule, Africa Regional Co-ordinator of Commonwealth Human Rights Initiatives; Nana Oye Lithur, Executive Director of Human Rights Advocacy Centre; Mr. Akoto Ampaw, Accra-based private legal practitioner; and Mr. Francis Ameyibor, an Accra-based media practitioner:
 International RTI standards revealed that exemptions should be narrowly formulated so as not to defeat the purpose and object of access to information.
 Therefore Ghanaian Civil Society Activists through the RTI Coalition recommends that; all exemptions in the Bill should be subjected to “a harms test”: That is to say, exempt information will remain exempt where it is proved that the harm in disclosure is greater than the public interest in disclosure.
 This is vital to include as the Constitution specifically states that the right to information is ‘subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society’. Hence the exemptions need to meet this standard.
 The Bill needs to do away with blanket exemptions as those currently exempting all information in the office of the President, the Vice-President; information relating to the cabinet, information relating to law enforcement, public safety and national security. The harms test should be applied to all exemptions.
 While clause 18 provides a public interest override, it sets out categories of public interest, and yet public interest may go beyond the listed categories. Hence Clause 18 should be opened up (e.g. by stating that “instances in which exempt information shall be disclosed ‘include the following’) and not restrictive.
 TIMELINES WITHIN THE BILL
 One of the principles of the right to information is that information requested for from a public body should be provided in a timely or expeditious manner. This is in recognition of the fact that information is needed for a specific purpose within a specific time.
 The times stipulated within the Bill defeat this principle as well as the right to information. Twenty-one working days in which officer shall notify one of decision on application (Clause 23(1); 14 days within which to give access (Clause 23 (3) (a); 21-days working days extension at the discretion of the officer (Clause 26) and 3-months extension where the Minister so permits; 30-days within which to notify the applicant on the decision on extension (Clause 26 (3).
 In addition, to these long time lines, applicants need to give a reason for the application when it is urgent, Clause 1 (4) in the Bill. This is unreasonable considering that it is the duty of the government to avail information and one should not give a reason for exercising this right.
 THE TIMELINES IN THE BILL NEED TO BE SHORTENED.
 The 21 working days within which the information officer should decide whether or not he or she will give you the information should be done away with. Upon application, the information Commissioner should be given 10 working days to handle the application.
 The 30-day time limit to notify the applicant under Clause 26 (3) of the Bill is inconsistent with Clause 26 (2) of the Bill; Revise Clause 26 (3) of the Bill.
 INCLUSION OF PRIVATE BODIES
 The scope of the Bill is rather limited. It should be a law that applies to all Public Bodies and not government agencies (as it currently provides).
 The term ‘government agency’ is too restrictive and excludes private bodies and chieftaincy institutions. The preamble should replace the term ‘government agency’ with ‘public body’ and add the term ‘private body’ alongside the term ‘public body.
 Private bodies which are, (i) owned, controlled or substantially financed directly or indirectly by funds provided by government, but only to the extent of that financing; or (ii) carrying out a statutory or public function, but only to the extent of that statutory or public function; (iii) companies that are engaged in exploitation of natural resources should be brought under the Act.
 The RTI law should also contain a provision which allows for access to information from a private body where the information may assist in the exercise or protection of any right. The application may state the right which is sought to be protected or exercised.
 There is no need for the Minister to come up with a separate set of legislation for private bodies and yet the Act can clearly and simultaneously stipulate the obligations of the relevant private bodies.
 INCLUSION OF CHIEFTAINCY INSTITUTIONS/TRADITIONAL AUTHORITIES
 Under Article 36 (8) of Ghana’s 1992 Constitution, it is clearly stated that: “the state shall recognise that the managers of public, stool, skin and family lands are fiduciaries charged with the obligation to discharge functions for the benefit respectively of the people of Ghana, of the stool, skin, or family concerned and are accountable as fiduciaries in this regard.”
 To the extent that they carry out public functions and need to account to the people with whom they have a fiduciary relationship, chieftaincy institutions or traditional authorities should be included in the Act.
 Hence, they should included as part of the public bodies within the purview of the Act, but only to the extent of their fiduciary functions e.g. information on royalties received, how such monies are spent etc.
 These institutions should also designate information officers who would have the duty to provide such information to the public.
 FEES PAYABLE UNDER THE BILL
 Fees payable under the Right to information law should not be such as would in effect deny one of his or her right. Information to be accessed under the law should be available in as inexpensive a manner as possible.
 The Bill is providing for different unjustifiable fees to be paid and restricts access where these fees are not paid. An application shall be accompanied by a relevant fee: Clause 19 (1) (f) in the Bill.
 Where the information officer decides to give access, the notice shall state the fees payable for dealing with the application, Clause 23(4)(d). Information can be denied where the required deposit or fee is not paid, Clause 23(6).Requires advance deposit if cost of dealing with application exceeds application fees, Clause 25 in the Bill.
 If advanced deposit is not paid, the agency can neglect request, Clause 25 (2) in the Bill. Denies applicant redress if deposit unpaid, Clause 23 (6) in the Bill. If application is rejected, applicant is still coerced to pay without granted access, Clause 23 (4) (d) in the Bill. Minister of Justice determines fees for search, retrieval, preparing information, and postage, Clause 50 in the Bill.
 The fees that should be emphasised by the law are the actual cost of reproduction of the information requested. Availing information is a duty of the government and not a business venture. One should not be required to pay a fee upon lodging or filing an application e.g. a deposit fee.
 One should not be required to pay a fee in relation to time spent by a body in searching for the information required. One should not be required to pay a fee where information sought is personal information.
 The requirement to pay an application fee for public information is absurd! The fees structure within the Bill should be consolidated in one section as it is currently scattered and would create room for abuse.
 INTERNAL REVIEWS AND APPEALS
 Internal Reviews – Under Clause 38, the Bill allows for applications for review of an information officer’s decision to be made to the Minister responsible for the agency.
 While this is an appropriate provision to settle issues at administrative level, the Sector Minister would usually have a heavy workload and reviewing information application requests may not be his or her priority.
 While Bill allows for this power to be designated under Clause 41; it is recommended that the power to conduct internal reviews be given to a senior ranking officer within the Ministry. This will make Clause 41 unnecessary and should be deleted.
 APPEALS
 Where information is denied, Clause 42 (1) provides that the applicant may apply for a judicial review within 21 working days to the Supreme Court! Other than being the final Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court is only situated in Accra.
 It is usually backlogged with numerous cases and it is not easily accessible (in terms of distance, time, finances and stature) to ordinary citizens. If such jurisdiction should be given to any Court, it should be the High Court.
 Notwithstanding, the right to information law should provide for an independent commission that would handle appeals from internal review mechanisms. This would be a specialised body that would be in a position to arbitrate such issues in a timely and cheaper manner.
 INDEPENDENT COMMISSION
 Clause 53 bestows the power to implement the Bill onto the Minister for Justice. The Minister for Justice/Attorney General has a huge workload as the case may be. They have a huge backlog of cases pending before the Courts and in many instances; cases do get adjourned because there is no representative from the Attorney-General’s department!
 They also have the duty to oversee a number of other laws e.g. Anti-corruption laws, which they are not in position to do! How then can the critical task of implementation of the right to information law be bestowed upon the minister?
 Furthermore, the minister of justice would be in a conflict of interest situation as a minister of Government and then as overseer of implementation of the law. There is an apparent lack of objectivity. This conflict is well brought out by Clause 54 which states that the Attorney General shall be a party to all proceedings in the Supreme Court.
 The Attorney General and the Minister of Justice are the same person! We need an independent commission that will not only monitor implementation of the law; but will develop the expertise to do so and be in position to carry out public education on the same.
 In addition to the monitoring and education mandate, it would also act as an arbitral/ adjudicative body in instances where appeals may be made from internal reviews.
 An independent commission can play the multiple roles of monitoring, promotion, and enforcement which currently no established body can do effectively. Just as an independent media commission; an electoral commission were set up for their various roles, so too would the independent information commission.
 IMPLEMENTATION
 The Bill does not provide a commencement date of the law. It does not specify which sections of the Bill should be implemented immediately e.g. development of manuals by all MDAs should be something that can be embarked upon immediately. Where a time-limit for implementation of the Bill is not set, it will delay implementation or result into non-implementation.
 The law should fix maximum time limit for enforcement. Another consideration may be phased implementation where the law specifies key MDA to implement in the first year or given time-frame.
 The following provisions can commence 3-4 months after enactment of the law: Filing information requests Amendment of information in personal records Proactive disclosure of already existing information
 RECORD-KEEPING
 While one of the biggest problems in our public bodies is record-keeping; the Bill is silent on recordkeeping and yet it is very vital that proper records are kept and maintained by public institutions. The information they hold is held on behalf of the public.
 The RTI Bill should reinforce the Ghana Public Records and Archives Administration Act, 1997 (Act 535). The Bill should have an explicit duty for public bodies to create, keep, maintain, and organize proper records.
 TRAINING OFFICERS
 Public and civil servants need to be trained on their duties/obligations under the Law. They need to be trained on the provisions of the law so that it can be effectively implemented. The law should therefore impose a duty on all institutions to train their officers to enable them comply with the provisions of the law.
 PUBLIC EDUCATION
 The public need to be educated on the law so that they can effectively utilize it. This is a duty that should be included in the Act and it can be carried out by the independent commission. It can do this in collaboration with other existing bodies with parallel obligations such as the National Commission for Civic Education. This duty should be clearly spelt out in the law.
 Ghanaian Law Makers over to You!!!!
 CIVIL SOCIETY FAULTS GHANA’S RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL, PROPOSES AMENDMENTS
 Written by Francis Ameyibor Wednesday, August 10, 2011
 Ghanaian civil society activists through the RTI Coalition has faulted some provisions of the country’s Right to Information (RTI) Bill presently before Parliament and called for their amendment. The group in a statement in Accra said that a critical review of the bill reveals that while Clauses 2 and 3 provide for proactive disclosure, the information that should be proactively disclosed is rather limited.
 According to the coalition in a statement jointly signed by Ms Caroline Nalule, Africa Regional Co-ordinator of Commonwealth Human Rights Initiatives; Nana Oye Lithur, Executive Director of Human Rights Advocacy Centre; Mr. Akoto Ampaw, Accra-based private legal practitioner; and Mr. Francis Ameyibor, an Accra-based media practitioner:
 International RTI standards revealed that exemptions should be narrowly formulated so as not to defeat the purpose and object of access to information.
 Therefore Ghanaian Civil Society Activists through the RTI Coalition recommends that; all exemptions in the Bill should be subjected to “a harms test”: That is to say, exempt information will remain exempt where it is proved that the harm in disclosure is greater than the public interest in disclosure.
 This is vital to include as the Constitution specifically states that the right to information is ‘subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society’. Hence the exemptions need to meet this standard.
 The Bill needs to do away with blanket exemptions as those currently exempting all information in the office of the President, the Vice-President; information relating to the cabinet, information relating to law enforcement, public safety and national security. The harms test should be applied to all exemptions.
 While clause 18 provides a public interest override, it sets out categories of public interest, and yet public interest may go beyond the listed categories. Hence Clause 18 should be opened up (e.g. by stating that “instances in which exempt information shall be disclosed ‘include the following’) and not restrictive.
 TIMELINES WITHIN THE BILL
 One of the principles of the right to information is that information requested for from a public body should be provided in a timely or expeditious manner. This is in recognition of the fact that information is needed for a specific purpose within a specific time.
 The times stipulated within the Bill defeat this principle as well as the right to information. Twenty-one working days in which officer shall notify one of decision on application (Clause 23(1); 14 days within which to give access (Clause 23 (3) (a); 21-days working days extension at the discretion of the officer (Clause 26) and 3-months extension where the Minister so permits; 30-days within which to notify the applicant on the decision on extension (Clause 26 (3).
 In addition, to these long time lines, applicants need to give a reason for the application when it is urgent, Clause 1 (4) in the Bill. This is unreasonable considering that it is the duty of the government to avail information and one should not give a reason for exercising this right.
 THE TIMELINES IN THE BILL NEED TO BE SHORTENED.
 The 21 working days within which the information officer should decide whether or not he or she will give you the information should be done away with. Upon application, the information Commissioner should be given 10 working days to handle the application.
 The 30-day time limit to notify the applicant under Clause 26 (3) of the Bill is inconsistent with Clause 26 (2) of the Bill; Revise Clause 26 (3) of the Bill.
 INCLUSION OF PRIVATE BODIES
 The scope of the Bill is rather limited. It should be a law that applies to all Public Bodies and not government agencies (as it currently provides).
 The term ‘government agency’ is too restrictive and excludes private bodies and chieftaincy institutions. The preamble should replace the term ‘government agency’ with ‘public body’ and add the term ‘private body’ alongside the term ‘public body.
 Private bodies which are, (i) owned, controlled or substantially financed directly or indirectly by funds provided by government, but only to the extent of that financing; or (ii) carrying out a statutory or public function, but only to the extent of that statutory or public function; (iii) companies that are engaged in exploitation of natural resources should be brought under the Act.
 The RTI law should also contain a provision which allows for access to information from a private body where the information may assist in the exercise or protection of any right. The application may state the right which is sought to be protected or exercised.
 There is no need for the Minister to come up with a separate set of legislation for private bodies and yet the Act can clearly and simultaneously stipulate the obligations of the relevant private bodies.
 INCLUSION OF CHIEFTAINCY INSTITUTIONS/TRADITIONAL AUTHORITIES
 Under Article 36 (8) of Ghana’s 1992 Constitution, it is clearly stated that: “the state shall recognise that the managers of public, stool, skin and family lands are fiduciaries charged with the obligation to discharge functions for the benefit respectively of the people of Ghana, of the stool, skin, or family concerned and are accountable as fiduciaries in this regard.”
 To the extent that they carry out public functions and need to account to the people with whom they have a fiduciary relationship, chieftaincy institutions or traditional authorities should be included in the Act.
 Hence, they should included as part of the public bodies within the purview of the Act, but only to the extent of their fiduciary functions e.g. information on royalties received, how such monies are spent etc.
 These institutions should also designate information officers who would have the duty to provide such information to the public.
 FEES PAYABLE UNDER THE BILL
 Fees payable under the Right to information law should not be such as would in effect deny one of his or her right. Information to be accessed under the law should be available in as inexpensive a manner as possible.
 The Bill is providing for different unjustifiable fees to be paid and restricts access where these fees are not paid. An application shall be accompanied by a relevant fee: Clause 19 (1) (f) in the Bill.
 Where the information officer decides to give access, the notice shall state the fees payable for dealing with the application, Clause 23(4)(d). Information can be denied where the required deposit or fee is not paid, Clause 23(6).Requires advance deposit if cost of dealing with application exceeds application fees, Clause 25 in the Bill.
 If advanced deposit is not paid, the agency can neglect request, Clause 25 (2) in the Bill. Denies applicant redress if deposit unpaid, Clause 23 (6) in the Bill. If application is rejected, applicant is still coerced to pay without granted access, Clause 23 (4) (d) in the Bill. Minister of Justice determines fees for search, retrieval, preparing information, and postage, Clause 50 in the Bill.
 The fees that should be emphasised by the law are the actual cost of reproduction of the information requested. Availing information is a duty of the government and not a business venture. One should not be required to pay a fee upon lodging or filing an application e.g. a deposit fee.
 One should not be required to pay a fee in relation to time spent by a body in searching for the information required. One should not be required to pay a fee where information sought is personal information.
 The requirement to pay an application fee for public information is absurd! The fees structure within the Bill should be consolidated in one section as it is currently scattered and would create room for abuse.
 INTERNAL REVIEWS AND APPEALS
 Internal Reviews – Under Clause 38, the Bill allows for applications for review of an information officer’s decision to be made to the Minister responsible for the agency.
 While this is an appropriate provision to settle issues at administrative level, the Sector Minister would usually have a heavy workload and reviewing information application requests may not be his or her priority.
 While Bill allows for this power to be designated under Clause 41; it is recommended that the power to conduct internal reviews be given to a senior ranking officer within the Ministry. This will make Clause 41 unnecessary and should be deleted.
 APPEALS
 Where information is denied, Clause 42 (1) provides that the applicant may apply for a judicial review within 21 working days to the Supreme Court! Other than being the final Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court is only situated in Accra.
 It is usually backlogged with numerous cases and it is not easily accessible (in terms of distance, time, finances and stature) to ordinary citizens. If such jurisdiction should be given to any Court, it should be the High Court.
 Notwithstanding, the right to information law should provide for an independent commission that would handle appeals from internal review mechanisms. This would be a specialised body that would be in a position to arbitrate such issues in a timely and cheaper manner.
 INDEPENDENT COMMISSION
 Clause 53 bestows the power to implement the Bill onto the Minister for Justice. The Minister for Justice/Attorney General has a huge workload as the case may be. They have a huge backlog of cases pending before the Courts and in many instances; cases do get adjourned because there is no representative from the Attorney-General’s department!
 They also have the duty to oversee a number of other laws e.g. Anti-corruption laws, which they are not in position to do! How then can the critical task of implementation of the right to information law be bestowed upon the minister?
 Furthermore, the minister of justice would be in a conflict of interest situation as a minister of Government and then as overseer of implementation of the law. There is an apparent lack of objectivity. This conflict is well brought out by Clause 54 which states that the Attorney General shall be a party to all proceedings in the Supreme Court.
 The Attorney General and the Minister of Justice are the same person! We need an independent commission that will not only monitor implementation of the law; but will develop the expertise to do so and be in position to carry out public education on the same.
 In addition to the monitoring and education mandate, it would also act as an arbitral/ adjudicative body in instances where appeals may be made from internal reviews.
 An independent commission can play the multiple roles of monitoring, promotion, and enforcement which currently no established body can do effectively. Just as an independent media commission; an electoral commission were set up for their various roles, so too would the independent information commission.
 IMPLEMENTATION
 The Bill does not provide a commencement date of the law. It does not specify which sections of the Bill should be implemented immediately e.g. development of manuals by all MDAs should be something that can be embarked upon immediately. Where a time-limit for implementation of the Bill is not set, it will delay implementation or result into non-implementation.
 The law should fix maximum time limit for enforcement. Another consideration may be phased implementation where the law specifies key MDA to implement in the first year or given time-frame.
 The following provisions can commence 3-4 months after enactment of the law: Filing information requests Amendment of information in personal records Proactive disclosure of already existing information
 RECORD-KEEPING
 While one of the biggest problems in our public bodies is record-keeping; the Bill is silent on recordkeeping and yet it is very vital that proper records are kept and maintained by public institutions. The information they hold is held on behalf of the public.
 The RTI Bill should reinforce the Ghana Public Records and Archives Administration Act, 1997 (Act 535). The Bill should have an explicit duty for public bodies to create, keep, maintain, and organize proper records.
 TRAINING OFFICERS
 Public and civil servants need to be trained on their duties/obligations under the Law. They need to be trained on the provisions of the law so that it can be effectively implemented. The law should therefore impose a duty on all institutions to train their officers to enable them comply with the provisions of the law.
 PUBLIC EDUCATION
 The public need to be educated on the law so that they can effectively utilize it. This is a duty that should be included in the Act and it can be carried out by the independent commission. It can do this in collaboration with other existing bodies with parallel obligations such as the National Commission for Civic Education. This duty should be clearly spelt out in the law.
 Ghanaian Law Makers over to You!!!!"	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"346"	2011-08-04	"Kumasi, Aug 5, GNA - The chieftaincy institution should be added to t= he public bodies covered by the Right to Information (RTI) Bill to make it mor= e accountable to the people.
Mr Francis Ameyibor, an Executive Member of the Coalition on the Right to Information, a civil society organization, who made the suggestion, explained that the situation where chiefs were not legally obliged to give account of the funds and resources they held on behalf of their subjects wa= s unacceptable.
This would have to change to allow for transparency, he said. He was speaking at a workshop held for selected journalists in Kumasi b= y the Coalition to deepen their understanding of the Bill which is before Parliament. Mr Ameyibor also raised concern about the silence of the Bill on recordkeeping, pointing out that without records the RTI would become illusory. He expressed dissatisfaction that proper recordkeeping had been on the back burner of many public agencies and private bodies.
He said it was important to make sure that the Bill reinforced the Ghan= a Public Records and Archives Administration Act, 1977 (Act 535). All agencies or bodies must manage information in a timely, safe and efficient manner, consistent with international best practices. Mr Ameyibor identified the numerous time extensions as another grey area, pointing out that, if passed into law in its present form, it could take an applicant more than half-of-a-year to receive information requested for.
He, therefore, called for the provision of different time frames for different types of information to be requested, saying, information bordering on life and liberty for example should not go beyond 48 hours. Again, he questioned the justification for applicants to bear the cost for time that it takes to retrieve information and said the fee structure was not user friendly.
Mr Ameyibor said Ghana should learn from the experiences of countries like South Africa and Uganda where the RTI is operating to avoid pitfalls."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"347"	2011-06-29	" Unlike in the UK and in Nigeria, which both passed their freedom of information bills after long periods of civil society activism, Ghana’s Right to Information (RTI) Bill is still stuck before Parliament. Whilst it is necessary that a strong bill, without unnecessary exemptions, is properly formulated, it is about time that we Ghanaians start enjoying the chunk of benefits that accompanies the RTI.
 The bill, if passed, would give power to the governed to know what goes on in the public offices which should help to make governments more accountable. In short the RTI bill will help to create a fuller and more dynamic democracy.
 Politicians should not forget that, they are elected to work towards the betterment of those they govern. They are not elected to suit their own whims and caprices. It seems politicians always want to take the electorate for granted, but they should not forget that the electorate are becoming more discerning day in and day out.
 The current NDC government and their NPP predecessors have overseen a country which has been hailed internationally as an African democratic success story, yet both parties have done little to move the bill forward. Democracy was defined by Abraham Lincoln as; government of the people, by the people, and for the people. From this definition, one could clearly see that Ghana is government of the people, by the people, but not for the people, in that the voice of the majority is not heard no matter how high they scream.
 Laws are made to be obeyed, if not they become useless, as stipulated in Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 constitution of Ghana that “All persons shall have the right to Information, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.”
 In a democracy, the people are sovereign – they are the highest form of political authority. Power flows from the people to the leaders of government, who hold power only temporarily. As a result politicians must always remember that they are only the temporary custodians for the information they hold in trust for the people
 Under a democratic government, citizens have an obligation to become informed about public issues, to watch carefully how their political leaders and representatives use their power and express their own opinions and interests.
 Democracy can never be practiced to the fullest if there is no transparency, and accountability that is requisite in a proper democracy. The more they prolong the passage of the bill, the more the citizens conceive the idea that, politicians have something to hide, but no matter how thick a forest may be, the tortoise will surely find its way to its home.
 Are Ghanaians safe if even in a democracy, they still cannot exercise their rights as citizens to know? Let us all rise in unity to support this worthy course, for it’s my right, it’s your right, it’s our right to know.
 Edward Balami,
 www.edwardbalami.blogspot.com Ghana Institute of Journalism."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"348"	2010-08-30	" A GNA Feature by Francis Ameyibor
 Accra, Aug. 30, GNA - Issues of environmental protection, climate change and global warming have in recent times assumed centre stage of discussions in Ghana with various organizations and institutions running workshops and seminars to educate the public on the need to adopt measures to defend Our Earth through healthy environmental practices.
 The realisation of the need to protect the environment brings to the fore the importance of the Right to Information (RTI) regime in Ghana to spell out the procedure for having access to environmental information and to strengthen citizens' access to environmental information, Mr Samuel D. E. K. Anku, a Director at the Environmental Protection Agency stated in Accra.
 Mr Anku's postulation, which was articulated at a roundtable organized by the Governance Africa Foundation, strengthens the premise that environmental democracy in Ghana could create opportunities for building strong civic constituencies that would support the growth of democracy and reinforce the Rule of Law.
 RTI PRE-REQUISITE FOR BUILDING STABLE INVESTMENT ENVIRONMENT
 Mr Anku noted: \"Integrating RTI in the national decision-making processes is a fundamental pre-requisite for building a stable and predictable environment for investment and business.\"
 In view of this the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in its policy direction is treating environmental issues as high priority public sector investment; using sound public finance principles with clear objectives; targets; cost-benefit analysis; performance monitoring and robust audit and compliance procedures to protect the environment.
 It's unpardonable that in spite of the fact that the RTI apart from its legal and democratic benefits has direct connection for creating stable investment and business environment, our governments under both the National Democratic Congress - 1993 to 2000 and 2009 to date; and the New Patriotic Party - 2001 to 2008, failed to pass the Bill.
 Mr Kwaku Baa-Owusu, Executive Director of Governance Africa Foundation, described the connection between the environment, business and democracy as a matrix, which provided grounds for examination of investment policies; its forms and shapes, and its direct and indirect impact on our environment, economy and governance systems.
 The framers of the 1992 Constitution acknowledged RTI as a fundamental human right of all persons in Ghana. \"It is only when those who are to participate in governance are well informed that they can contribute meaningfully to governance. This can only be achieved if they have access to the relevant information.
 .when citizens are conscious of their rights, they are able to demand for accountability and responsibility on the part of their government\".
 The primary conceptual foundation for the right of citizens to information is the principle of sovereignty of the people. It is in this regard that the very first Article and Provision of the 1992 Constitution - Article 1 Clause 1 affirms the sovereignty of the people in these immortal words: \"The sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of Ghana in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of government are to be exercised in the manner and within the limits laid down in this Constitution\".
 RTI is, therefore, an important mechanism for securing social justice, protecting the environment that The Almighty God has freely given to us and mandated us as its custodian.
 GHANA UNDER OBLIGATION TO EFFORCE RTI
 Ghana in 1992 endorsed the Rio Earth declaration. Principle 10 states: \"Environmental issues are best handled with participation of all concerned citizens, at the relevant levels.
 \"At the national level, each individual shall have appropriate access to information concerning the environment that is held by public authorities, including information on hazardous materials and activities in their communities, and the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process.
 \"States shall facilitate and encourage public awareness and participation by making information widely available. Effective access to judicial and administrative proceedings, including redress and remedy, shall be provided\".
 To make possible citizens involvement in environmental decision-making, the above principles highlights three fundamental access rights that empower citizens - access to information, environmental democracy and awareness for seeking redress and remedy.
 When these rights are both protected by law and embodied in government practices, decisions are more likely to be equitable and environmentally sustainable and more likely to be fully implemented.
 RTI ENFORCES ENVIRONMENTAL DEMOCRACY
 Environmental democracy is about government being transparent, accountable and inclusive in making decisions that affect the environment. The term environmental democracy reflects increasing recognition that environmental issues must be addressed by all those affected by the outcome and not just by government and industry.
 It captures the principle of equal rights for all those in the environment debate including the public; community groups; advocates; industrial leaders; workers; governments; academics and health care professionals.
 For those whose daily lives reflect the quality of their environment, participation in environmental decision-making is as important as in education; health care; finance and government. A complex relationship, therefore, exists between democratic politics and the management of the environment.
 The RTI regime from the perspective of environmental experts serve as stronger tool for implementing environmental sustainable strategies; creates new economic opportunities for poor people and also promotes equity and social justice.
 Democratic freedoms encourage access to information such as planning documents; budgets; reports on local environmental conditions or pollution records which can help citizens to protect their environmental interest.
 LACK OF RTI LIMITS ENVIROMENTAL DEMOCRACY
 Mr Anku identified the lack of RTI regime as a major limitation for environmental democracy as the classification of some form of information as \"Confidential\" on the grounds of national security provides a broad cloak while repressive measures for wrongful disclosure by government officials and the lack of sanctions for failure to provide access do not encourage access to information.
 He said the high cost involved in accessing information in government possession; limits effort made to reach a wide range of stakeholders with information including the disadvantaged groups.
 In a democratic dispensation, the government is simply an elected and mandated agent, the representative of the people, the citizens are the principals...\"it ought to be obvious that any information in the hands of governmental agencies or public bodies is by that very fact information that is held for and on behalf of the people by that government agency or body\".
 Mr Anku, therefore, urged civil society organizations to work with Government to promote the implementation of the rights of access to information; participation and justice in environmental decision-making through communication; environmental legal education; capacity building and legal assistance for local communities.
 OKYEHENE'S OBESSION AND CALCULATED GESTICULATION
 In his contribution, Osagyefuo Amoatia Ofori Panin II, Okyehene, said: \"I sometimes wonder whether our policy makers care about our environment with their lukewarm attitude towards environmental issues\".
 Speaking with obsession and calculated gesticulation, Osagyefuo Ofori Panin II said since independence, the country had not experienced any meaningful transformation from the central government \"yet we have the audacity to say chiefs don't matter in decision-making of this country.
 He said traditional rulers, who modern day saints consider as primitive, instituted measures, norms customs and traditions that protected the environment, water bodies, and the ecosystem.
 \"But with all our modern education today, we are rather destroying what our ancestors protected and built for us. Activities of illegal miners are destroying our country but the security agencies sit down without concern\".
 Osagyefuo Ofori Panin II cautioned: \"I have done all within my powers to stop illegal mining and chainsaw operation to no avail.they are stubborn because they are not afraid of Okyehene, am going to mobilise my people to defend our land\".
 He called for proactive environmental protection brigade to defend the lands and natural resources.
 With the revelation from environmental experts of an interconnectivity between RTI and the protection of our environment, its now time that the broad spectrum of society, including traditional rulers, environmental non-governmental organisations, academia and the industrial community to join the crusade for the passage of the RTI bill."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"349"	2010-08-20	"Wa, Aug 21, GNA - The Right To Information (RTI) Bill is not about witch hunting and throwing people in authority out of their jobs.
It is rather to promote transparency and ensure that state resources are used judiciously, Alhaji Alhassan Abudulai, a member of Eworld/Muslim Sector has said.
He noted that probity and accountability could only be achieved in a regime where information was readily made available on request because corruption strives in an environment of secrecy.
Alhaji Alhassan was giving an overview of the RTI Bill, which is before Parliament, at a workshop for about 50 advocates, drawn from government agencies, human rights and civil society groups, in the Upper West Region, at Wa.
The workshop was organized by the Coalition on the Right to Information, a network of civil society organizations and individuals advocating for the RTI law in Ghana.
The coalition is undertaking multiple advocacy activities through out the country to create awareness and support for the Bill and to ensure that the Bill reflect international standards.
Mr. Francis Ameyibor, a staff of the Ghana News Agency, said the Bill when passed into law, would strengthen democratic principles and values in the country.
He urged the participants to prepare towards contributing to the Bill when the Parliamentary Committee goes round the country for consultations to seek public views.
Mr. Cletus Azangweo, former director, Public Records-Archives and Administration Department, noted that proper record management would play an important role in the operation of the RTI Law.
He observed that there was no clear strategy for information management in the country and suggested the institution of a legislation to govern the management of records."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"350"	2010-08-18	"Bolgatanga, Aug 19, GNA - The Coalition on the Right to Information has reiterated its call on civil society organizations and individuals to join the advocacy train and demand for the Right to Information (RTI) bill to be passed into law.
\"The coalition maintains that the right to information is fundamental to the realization of economic and social rights as well as civil and political rights. It seeks to promote accountability and empowerment of the citizenry in a democratic society\".
Nana Oye Lithur, a legal practitioner and a human rights activist, made the call on Thursday at a one-day workshop organized in Bolgatanga.
She said numerous provisions in the Bill had still not been reviewed to reflect international best practice standards.
Nana Oye Lithur said even though the current RTI Bill stipulated that it was the responsibility of the government to provide information on governance, the principle of maximum disclosure was however undermined by undue delay, cumbersome and rather expensive fee regime and lack of coverage of private bodies.
Nana Oye Lithur said maximum disclosure was the overriding principle of any effective freedom of information law but the RTI Bill was still weak on that point.
\"It is further undermined by the numerous exemptions from clauses 5-17, some of which are loosely worded and unnecessarily repeated without being adequately subjected to the harms test\", she said.
She suggested that there should be a requirement for the manuals produced by government agencies to include their policies and reasons for adopting them
This would facilitate the peoples' right to know government dealings as the basic requirement for the right to Information Law.
She suggested that the RTI Law should cover all public bodies, including the Chieftaincy Institution, to ensure complete freedom of information for the Ghanaian public.
Ms Caroline Nalule, Regional Coordinator of the Commonwealth Human rights Initiative (CHRI) Africa Office, said for one to participate in democratic governance, one needed to be well informed on all aspects of the country so as to whip up interest to do so.
\"When people are well informed, they feel empowered to get involved and also call for accountability, which would help to minimize or eradicate corruption in society\", she said.
Ms Nalule said freedom to Information could also help alleviate poverty and encourage investors as people needed information about a particular society to encourage them invest there."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"351"	2010-08-01	"Accra, Aug. 2, GNA - The Liberia House of Representatives has set the pace for West African giants, Ghana and Nigeria, by passing the Right to Information Bill into law last month.
Passage of the Bill by the members was preceded by intense lobbying and advocacy by members of the Liberia Freedom of Expression Coalition, the Liberia Media Law and Policy Reform working Group and the Liberia Civil society Consortium on Freedom of Information.
This was contained in a statement made available to the Ghana News Agency in Accra.
Mr Malcolm Joseph, Chairman of Liberia Freedom of Expression Coalition and Consortium, said passage of the RTI Law was a step to make information accessible by all Liberians.
He said the Law had been transmitted to the Liberian Senate for endorsement.
Mr Joseph expressed gratitude to the Open Society Initiative for West Africa, Carter Center, UNESCO, International Freedom of Expression Exchange (IFEX), International Media Support and Partnership for Media and Conflict Prevention in West Africa for the level of support rendered the process.
He said that Liberians would continue to count on more support to ensure that the Senate agreed with the House on the passage as well as its implementation.
The Freedom of Information Law was among three draft laws submitted to the House on April 18, 2008, by the Liberia Media Law and Policy Reform working group.
The other draft laws are public service Broadcaster Law and law to establish an Independent Broadcast regulator for Liberia.
The Independent Broadcast Regulator law has since 2009 been passed by the House of Representatives and is presently before the Liberian Senate for endorsement, while the Public Service Broadcaster Act is still with a committee in the House."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"352"	2010-05-11	"THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL---MATTERS ARISING.
The Right to Information Bill has been laid before Parliament for deliberations  and hopefully,for passage.
This is a Bill which in all honesty when properly scrutinized,non-partisantly debated and passed will go a long way in entrenching and fortifying our young democracy.
 The essence of this Bill is to empower the citizenry to hold to account all our officials in positions of TRUST & RESPONSIBILITY,be he the President ,Minister,Member of Parliament,Head of Government Institutions and what have you..
For far too long our leaders have been riding rough-shod on us and are neither Transparent nor Accountable to us the people whose interests they are supposed to represent.
Coming to the Bill itself there are areas which if not corrected or removed will do UNTOLD HARM and render the whole Bill unworkable..
These points were clearly and unambiguously high-lighted by Lawyer Mr.Akoto Ampaw when he gave a lecture at the Ghana International Press Centre on the World Press Freedom Day  Celebration on the theme “Freedom of Information:The Right to Know”
According to him Section 7 (3) of the RTI Bill states that “All information created by or in the custody of the Security Agencies is totally EXEMPT” emphasis mine.
 He conceded that nobody is saying that every information in the hands of the Security Agencies should be disclosed to the public,but that non-disclosure should be related to the “HARM TEST”.That is information should not be disclosed to the public if its disclosure would cause a REAL HARM  to national security.
The other contentious aspect of the Bill as he mentioned  are a number of very dangerous blanket provisions,which states that all information apart from data and figures in the offices of the President ,the Vice-President and Cabinet stood exempted.
Mr Akoto.Ampaw further averred that if there is going to be wrong-doing in this country,then the places where the worse wrong doing can occur are precisely the office of the President,office of the Vice-President and the Cabinet office. I couldn’t agree with him more.
Let me support his argument with three historical facts for the benefit of those who may think otherwise.
The first case involved the late President Richard Nixon( Tricky Dicky) of the U.S.A. In his desperate schme to get re-elected for the second time,he set up a covert organization known as Committee to Re-elect the President (C.R.P). Amongst some of their clandestine activities were to bug the offices of their political opponents the Democrats.This clearly was the President of the U.S.A involving in a criminal activity and went to all lengths to cover it up.
Two fearless and courageous journalists by the names of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein were instrumental in exposing this criminal act which resulted in the Impeachment of President Nixon though he was later given a Presidential Pardon by President Ford.Any one interested in this case should read the book “All the President’s Men” by these two journalists or watch the film by the same name which starred Robert Bedford and Dustin Hoffman.
The second case involved again a Republican President Ronald Reagan who used Colonel Oliver North to illegally arm the Nicaragua Contra Rebels to overthrow the legitimate Government of that country,again this was an illegal act contrary to the Constitution of the U.S.A. Again Ronald Reagan and his criminal gangs were exposed to the whole world for what they were.
The third case is the recent British MP’s fraudulent expenses account which was exposed by the efforts of a seasoned journalist.
When this case Came to Parliament the former speaker of Parliament Mr Michael Martin employed all the subterfuge and intimidatory  tactics to suppress the truth coming out..
He claimed that Parliament was immune from outside investigation     asserting Parliamentary immunity.
Eventually the case ended up in the High Court and the learned judge ruled that once it was the taxpayers money involved ,the taxpayer has the right to know how their monies were being used.As of now some MP’s are facing fraud charges with the possibility of a custodial sentence.
Can this happen in Ghana? Not with the current crop of yellow –bellied journalist who can be easily bought to look the other way.
Can the three highest offices of the land too be trusted to behave absolutely cleanly and in the spirit and letter of the Constitution?
If what happened under the former President Kuffour is anything to go by the unequivocal answer is NO.
Just look at what happened in the Tsatsu Tsikata case when Kuffour empanelled the Supreme Court with extra Judges to give judgement in his favour when he lost the original case against Mr. Tsikata.
The Present Government should do the decent thing and remove those parts of the Bill which is anti-democratic. They should remember that they are not going to be in power for-ever and that one day they will be out of office,so they better do the decent thing.
The other thing is the time line for which officials should give an answer to any one seeking information under the bill.A reasonable time-frame should be  30 working days,no more no less.I pray that all our MP’s read the Bill line by line and vote on non-partisan basis in the interest of our motherland.
This Bill plus the Whistleblowers Act combined will be an effective weapon for the citizenry to hold in check and accountable our leaders who act on our behalves in whichever capacity we put them. All our political leaders,current and future should remember this dictum, “All Politics invariably tend to end up in tears”
 God bless Ghana our Motherland.
Kwaku. Kele.Ashiagbor"	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"353"	2010-05-10	" THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL---MATTERS ARISING.
 The Right to Information Bill has been laid before Parliament for deliberations  and hopefully,for passage. This is a Bill which in all honesty when properly scrutinized,non-partisantly debated and passed will go a long way in entrenching and fortifying our young democracy.
 The essence of this Bill is to empower the citizenry to hold to account all our officials in positions of TRUST & RESPONSIBILITY,be he the President ,Minister,Member of Parliament,Head of Government Institutions and what have you.. For far too long our leaders have been riding rough-shod on us and are neither Transparent nor Accountable to us the people whose interests they are supposed to represent.
 Coming to the Bill itself there are areas which if not corrected or removed will do UNTOLD HARM and render the whole Bill unworkable.. These points were clearly and unambiguously high-lighted by Lawyer Mr.Akoto Ampaw when he gave a lecture at the Ghana International Press Centre on the World Press Freedom Day  Celebration on the theme “Freedom of Information:The Right to Know” According to him Section 7 (3) of the RTI Bill states that “All information created by or in the custody of the Security Agencies is totally EXEMPT” emphasis mine. He conceded that nobody is saying that every information in the hands of the Security Agencies should be disclosed to the public,but that non-disclosure should be related to the “HARM TEST”.That is information should not be disclosed to the public if its disclosure would cause a REAL HARM  to national security.
 The other contentious aspect of the Bill as he mentioned  are a number of very dangerous blanket provisions,which states that all information apart from data and figures in the offices of the President ,the Vice-President and Cabinet stood exempted."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"354"	2008-06-23	" Accra, June 24, GNA - Members of Ghana Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) on Tuesday, launched a 36-page book, which is a critique on the proposed Bill demanding an effective and clear-worded statute.
 The Coalition, while acknowledging the recent review of the Bill by the Government Statute Law Commission, said \"in our view there are still critical needs for further review to render the Bill in line with international best practice standards\".
 They observed that although the current Bill tried to comply with some of these principles, there were still certain provisions that were not up to the required standards hence the need for the critique. Professor Kwame Karikari, Executive Director, Media Foundation for West Africa, who launched the book at a two-day National Advocacy Training Conference for RTI Coalition members, said the review would enhance the full enjoyment of the right by the public when the law was enacted.
 The RTI Critique also raised concerns about the procedure for accessing information under the Bill, which it considered was cumbersome.
 The requirement for filing applications within strict time lines accompanied by fees were not in accordance with the principles of limited costs and applicant-friendly procedures and therefore needed to be reviewed, the Coalition said.
 This in addition to the long timelines provided within which an application is dealt with, the least of which being 21 days and a further 21 days in case of a transfer of an application. \"The general layout of the Bill is not user-friendly. The separation of related sections, for instance, the general right to information and procedure for access, makes it difficult for a reader to follow the provisions in a consistent manner. \"This should be improved to enable ease of navigation by revising the chapterization of the operative provisions.\" Prof. Karikari said the peoples' right to access information had been widely recognized as an essential prerequisite for an effective and functional democracy in Ghana.
 The critique is aimed at highlighting some of the key shortfalls in the current Bill that need to be reviewed to place it in line with best practice standards.
 Prof Karikari said these standards as espoused by the United Nations included maximum disclosure, the obligation to publish, limited scope of exceptions, user-friendly access procedures, limited costs, open meetings, overriding disclosure principle, promotion of open government and protection of whistleblowers. In an interview with Ghana News Agency after the launch, Nana Oye Lithur, Africa Regional Coordinator of Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, said although the Bill contained a general right of access to information by the public, \"this is limited in scope to information in the custody or control of a Government agency and not private bodies\". She said Section 66 of the Bill did not adequately cover all public authorities in Ghana and should rather be substituted with \"public organ\" which would also cover chieftaincy institutions as well as such offices as Office of the President and Vice President. Instead, Section 64 of the Bill empowered the Attorney General to extend the coverage of this law to the private sector by Legislative Instrument.
 \"This in effect underrates the desired impact of the law by limiting it to a mere segment of public bodies and disregarding the integrated nature of public and private bodies in undertaking public service functions,\" Nana Oye noted.
 She explained that enacting another legislation to cover private bodies ran the risk of creating unnecessary duplicity of laws and this was more likely to create public confusion on the procedural technicalities of information access.
 \"The underlying rationale is that whereas public and private bodies render public functions, people have no direct claim to information from the private sector save for that needed to enforce a legal right.\" The Coalition recommended that the Bill be revised to incorporate private bodies.
 It also raised concern about the failure of the Bill to take cognizance of chieftaincy institutions that often served as public organ in Ghana and should potentially be bound by the provisions of the law to reflect the practical situation.
 It said the Bill failed to underscore the principle of maximum disclosure as the overriding premise of the law, adding that the preamble fell short of explicitly highlighting the objective. The Coalition noted that the critique was to help Government understand the concerns of civil society organisations and also to make an input into the Bill.
 \"The Bill did not specify the commencement date of the law, which creates uncertainty and poses a dangerous likelihood of postponing the implementation of the law indefinitely.
 \"It must therefore, provide for a specific timeline for commencement and implementation of the operative provisions of the Bill as failure to specify a commencement date in the legislation itself can otherwise undermine the use of the law in practice.\""	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"355"	2010-04-29	" Accra, April 30, GNA - A member of the National Media Commission (NMC), on Friday said some elements of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill were negative and could suppress freedom of expression of the citizenry. Mr. Akoto Ampaw said the elements include, nature and intent of some exemptions for disclosure of information, timeline to disclosure, the fees regime and the appeal provisions in the bill.
 He was speaking at a public lecture to mark the World Press Freedom Day in Accra, which falls on Monday, 3rd May 2010. Mr. Ampaw accused Cabinet Sub-committee that reviewed the bill of introducing those elements and called on the media to highlight the negativities for full public engagement. \"In demanding the legislation to Right to Information and Broadcasting Law in the country, we must be concerned about not just any law at all that could serve as a means by which the elite and the bureaucrats would use to restrict or deny the citizenry the right and access to information,\" he said.
 Mr. Ampaw cited that countries like Ethiopia, Zimbabwe and Angola were operating the Information law but the law were designed to deny the citizenry access to information. He expressed dismay that the content of the RTI Bill was not known to the public.
 Mr. Ampaw asked \"why is it that the content of it has not been given the widest publicity so that Ghanaians can talk about them and flush out any negative elements. How many Ghanaians know the content of the bill?\" He said the bill contained blanket exemption elements that were not clearly defined but could be used by politicians and bureaucrats to wield unbridled power and to carry out nefarious activities to the detriment of the state and citizens.
 Mr Ampaw said \"I am not saying confidential matters at the offices of the President and Vice President and Cabinet and National Security level should be revealed to the public. But unless you demonstrate or prove that the disclosure of information would be harmful to the citizenry but not the politician, there is no point for non-disclosure\". He said the nature of some of provision in the exemption in the bill remained a major step backwards that Ghanaians needed to resist. Speaking on the timeline provision to disclosure in the RTI Bill, Mr Ampaw said it was sad that at this age of technologically fast-paced developed world, where delay in relaying of information could cause harm, the provision guaranteed 146 days where one could have access to information after the request had been tendered in.
 He said the fee regime needed to be simplified adding \"there is a provision that says that the time and efforts that it takes to locate data can be an element to determine the fee charged.\"
 Mr. Ampaw contended that the inefficiency of record keeping on the part of personnel in the departments and agencies should not determine the fees. Mr. Ampaw criticised the provision in which the Minister of Justice would be responsible for ensuring that the bill was enforced. Concerning the broadcasting bill, he said the issues of who would be eligible to apply and own a broadcasting station, the procedures to procure it, the body responsible to grant frequencies, who is to regulate and monitor and the one to sanction erring broadcasting stations, required a second look.
 Mr. Ampaw said that the NMC should be in charge of allocating and regulating the frequencies but not the National Communications Authority that was not independent.
 He said the chieftaincy institution that manage lands in the name and on behalf of the people needed to be accountable to the people to regarding management of revenues generated from land.
 Mr Berifi Apenteng, a member of the NMC and Chairman for the Coalition for a Broadcasting Law, expressed hope that the lecture would create the platform for the public to engage in meaningful discussion of the RTI Bill and the Broadcasting Bill to promote freedom of expression. The lecture, which was under the theme: \"Freedom of Information and Broadcasting Laws: Relevance to Press Freedom\", was organised by Ghana Journalists Association and sponsored by Accra Brewery Limited. World Press Freedom Day was instituted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1993.
 The day had been set aside to remind governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental as well as civil societies of the crucial role free press plays in strengthening democracy and fostering development in the world. It is also to serve as an occasion to remind both government and the citizenry of the need to respect commitments to press freedom and the theme for this year's celebration is \" Freedom of Information: the Right to Know\". 30 April 10"	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"356"	2010-03-15	"Accra, March 15, GNA - A Chief Economist of World Bank's Africa Regi= on, on Monday said the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill togethe= r with media support could help curb \"quiet corruption\" in the country. Mr. Shantayanan Devarajan, Principal Economist and Research Manager for Public Economics in the Development Research Group of the World Bank, sai= d quiet corruption occurred when public servants failed to deliver services= or inputs that had been paid for by governments.
He was interacting with selected journalists in Accra from Washingto= n, DC, USA, in a video conference in which several countries participated. The event was to launch the Africa Development Indicators (ADI) 2010=
report which focuses on how quiet corruption leads to an increasingly negative expectation of service delivery system such as absentee teachers= in public schools, absentee doctors in primary clinics, drugs being stolen f= rom public clinics and sold on the open market as well as subsidised fertiliz= er being diluted before it reaches farmers.
Mr. Devarajan observed that quiet corruption, though pervasive and widespread in Africa, did not make the headlines the way bribery scandals=
did adding the act had long term negative repercussions that undermined development in Africa.
\"Tackling quiet corruption would require a combination of strong and=
committed leadership, policies and institutions at the sectoral level, an= d most importantly, increased accountability and participation by citizens\"= , he said. He conceded that though the 2010 report did not take into account t= he cultural nuances of the countries studied such as Ghana where teachers an= d doctors in public institutions could absent themselves from duty for soci= al reasons such as funerals, he stressed that their counterparts in the priv= ate sector were operating in the same cultural dispensation but comparatively=
productive because of proper incentives and better conditions of service.
Mr. Devarajan said the report showed economic indicators and explanations into why quiet corruption was a hindrance to achieving long and short term development goals and offered solutions to the challenge as we= ll. \"Although there is no 'one size fits all' recommendation that appli= es to every sector, this essay advocates the need for strong and highly motivated leadership in the fight against corruption, commitment and capacity of the national anti-corruption units to pursue operationally effective responses at the sector level, and adequate policies and institutions\", he said.
He said successful implementation of anti-corruption reforms requir= ed that the preferences and interests of all those involved be aligned with achieving the objectives of the reform adding, the act involved better working conditions. Mr. Sebastien Dessus, a Lead Economist at the World Bank, Ghana Office, said it was difficult accessing information and gathering data on=
government's public expenditure at the basic level.
He lauded the initiative of the World Bank Group in spearheading the=
submission of the Right to Information Bill to the floor of Parliament an= d expressed the hope it would be adequately debated and effectively implemented. Mr. Dessus called for the empowerment of poor people to build pressu= re on public institutions and government to improve the quality of service delivery they offered and to disseminate information or published reports= or surveys to promote transparency to stem the tide on corruption. The ADI 2010 report provides detailed collection of data on Africa available in a volume. It contains over 450 macroeconomic, sectoral and social indicators covering 53 African countries.
It is designed to provide all those interested in Africa with a focu= sed and convenient set of data to monitor development programmes and aid flow= s in the region with an invaluable reference tool for analysts and policymakers who want a better understanding of economic and social developments in Africa. The ADI report states that the debate on quiet corruption will bring=
about the recognition that government spending on social services alone i= s not sufficient and that the quantity and quality of public services requi= re the development of a third generation of indicators that measure quality of services and the performance of service providers."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"357"	2010-02-25	"Accra, Feb. 25, GNA - The National Media Commission (NMC) on Thursday appealed to Parliament to review the deadline for submission of memoranda on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill and facilitate the ready availability of copies of the Bill to the public.
It said Parliament should allow sufficient time for the public to obtain copies of the Bill, study the provisions thereof, before submitting memoran da or otherwise making contribution to the legislative process on the Bill.
The appeal was made in a statement issued in Accra and signed by Mr. Kabral Blay-Amihere, Chairman of the NMC, in reaction to a call by Parliame nt to the public to submit memoranda on the RTI Bill by March 2, 2010.
It said the NMC considered the deadline as impractical since to date, the Bill was still not available to the public (at the Assembly Press). \"In the circumstance, it is, with respect, not possible for citizens and their organisations to submit any memoranda on a Bill the contents of which they have not seen, much less studied,\" the statement said. It said the Right to Information was founded on the sovereignty of the people and their right to know what government and public bodies were doing in their name and on their behalf.
This way, the statement said, transparency in public affairs and accountability of government to the people could be better secured. \"A right to information law thus goes to the very heart of our democratic system of governance and every opportunity should be provided citizens to make informed input into the legislative process so that, we have a right to information legislation that truly upholds the citizen's right to information and promotes openness, transparency and accountability in the affairs of the state,\" it said.
\"While it is understandable that Parliament should be anxious to pass into law the Right to Information Bill without undue delay, 17 years after the Constitution, which guarantees this right, came into effect, we are still of the view that we should allow full public debate and nation-wide consultations on the Bill before it is passed into law\". \"This will ensure that whatever enactment eventually comes into force enjoys the support, ownership and understanding of the people, whom the law seeks to empower, \"the statement added."	1	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"358"	2010-01-20	"Accra, Jan. 20, GNA - The Right to Information (RTI) Coalition is to hit the streets of Accra on January 27 with a public awareness
march dubbed \"Thousand-Man March,\" to register their protest at the continuous delay in the passage of the RTI Bill. The Thousand-Man March is being organised jointly by the RTI Coalition in collaboration with the Commonwealth Human Rights
Initiatives, Civil Servants Association of Ghana, Ghana Trades Union Congress, Ghana Journalists Association, The Editors Forum, and
the Moslem Associations. Others to participate in the march are Ghana Centre for Democratic Development (CDD-Ghana), Media Foundation for West Africa,
Publish What You Pay Ghana; Human Rights Advocacy Centre; Tertiary Institutions and cross section of the general public. In a statement to the Ghana News Agency in Accra on Wednesday, Nana Oye Lithur, RTI Convener, said a notification letter had
been sent to the Greater Accra Regional Police Commander, Deputy Commissioner of Police Rose Atinga Bio. The Coalition explained that the Public March was being organised with the aim of increasing public awareness on the RTI Bill as
efforts were underway for the passage of the law by Parliament. According to the organisers, the March will commence at 0600 hours at Kwame Nkrumah Circle, Obra Spot, through the Kwame
Nkrumah Avenue to the Ministry of Justice and Attorney-General's Department, Accra. In an interview with Ghana News Agency, Nana Oye said while acknowledging the effort of Government over the last few months on
the Bill, \"we need to intensify the public awareness campaign to ensure that Ghanaians understand the issues at stake\"."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"359"	2009-11-13	"Tema, Nov 13, GNA -- Mawuli Amegadzi, the 45-year-old Togolese Paedophile who sucked the genitals of two boys has been sentenced to a 20-year jail term by the Tema Circuit Court 'A'.
Amegadzi was convicted on his own plea of guilty on two counts of having unnatural canal knowledge of the boys.
The court presided over by Mrs. Lorinda Owusu, sentenced him to 20 years on each of the two counts, to run concurrently. Prosecuting, Chief Inspector Matilda Tetteh, told the court that the complainant who is father of two of Amegadzi's victims, resides in the same vicinity as the convict, who is a mason at Kpone-Kokompe near Tema. Chief Inspector Tetteh said the father observed that his sons aged eight and 11 always returned home from town with candies, biscuits and football and, therefore, questioned them on several occasions. The man, the prosecution said, intensified his questioning when he received information from neighbours that for some time now, they had been seeing his two sons coming out from the residence of Amegadzi who was known for such acts.
The prosecution indicated that the victims, who initially refused to confide in their father, narrated their ordeal to him. Chief Inspector Tetteh told the court that, according to the victims, the convict sucked their genitals while he masturbated to discharge on to the floor, and then gave them the items. The victims' father lodged a complaint with the Kpone Police, which also transferred the matter to the Domestic Violence and Victims Support Unit (DOVVSU) of the Tema Regional Police Command. Chief Inspector Tetteh said Amedadzi who was apprehended on November 10, has similar cases pending in court. Before his sentence was read to him, Amegadzi told the court that he started the act when he was 13 years old, and because it has become a habit, he finds it difficult to stop. 13 Nov 09
NSOC 002 Social RTI Medicine Patients have the right to know their state of health-Ampaw
Accra, Nov. 12, GNA -Medical Practitioners must as a matter of duty and law inform patients about the state and condition of their health and remedies available, Mr. Akoto Ampaw, Executive Member of the Right to Information Coalition of Ghana, has said. \"In order to respect the autonomy of the patient, it is important that he or she is fully informed about and understand the potential benefits and dangers of the choice of treatment he or she is being given,\" he said. Speaking at monthly dialogue series of the African Commission of Health and Human Rights Promoters (CAPSDH), Mr. Ampaw said the patient had the right to be informed about his condition, treatment and the alternative choices and risks that go with them.
The dialogue on the theme: \"Hippocratic Oath within the Framework of the Right to Information,\" seeks to create a platform for health professionals and human rights activists to discuss the oath and scrutinize the RTI bill, which will set the pace for combining health knowledge with knowledge of law and ethics.
According to Mr. Ampaw, any breakdown in communication between the medical practitioner and the patient can lead to tension, disagreement and resentment.
\"Unfortunately, partly because of the pressure on our doctors, the mass production character of their practice and sometimes the elitist attitudes of doctors to simple ordinary patients, many medical doctors do not in their practice demonstrate this responsibility to inform the patient about his condition and the treatment being given,\" he said. Mr. Ampaw said in most of these cases, patients were simply treated as objects and not autonomous human beings capable of understanding their condition and the nature of treatment prescribed.
This, he said, was dangerous because it \"dis-empowers\" the patient who might commit some error because of lack of full disclosures of the nature of the ailment and treatment by the medical practitioner. He said part of the Hippocratic Oath that enjoined medical practitioners to keep secrets raised the question of patient-medical practitioner privilege, the matter of confidentiality of information that comes to the knowledge of the medical practitioner in the course of his treatment of patient.
Mr. Ampaw said the country's Evidence Decree does not provide for a general patient-physician privilege, rather made provision for confidentiality of communication between patient and a physician or psychologist etc in the diagnosis or treatment of a mental or emotional condition. The anomaly, he said, was corrected by the RTI Bill which sets out a general patient-physician or other medical expert privilege of communication.
On sanctions for medical practitioners who violate the Hippocratic Oath, Mr. Ampaw said the law gave authority to the Medical and Dental Council to secure the public interest by ensuring the highest standards in the practice of medicine and dentistry. The council plays this role through the penal and disciplinary committees by examining complaints against practitioners and effecting the appropriate punishment. Mr. Ampaw was, however, not happy about the lack of guidelines as to what constitutes 'infamous conduct in a professional respect,' saying it was unsatisfactory to give the disciplinary committee such wide discretion to determine what constituted infamous conduct. He has, therefore, urged the medical Council to evoke the power to make by-laws vested in it by the Medical and Dental Act to establish clear guidelines for medical practitioners as is the case in the United Kingdom. \"I would like to suggest that the Ghana Medical Association takes the lead in consulting with the Ministry of Health and the Attorney General to ensure that we also have some elaborate binding rules to guide medical practitioners in carrying out their profession in an ethical manner,\" he said. On the RTI Bill, he said the medical profession and practitioners would be affected in varied ways by the character of the provisions of a right to information law. The law can contribute to enhancing the practice in the cause of saving peoples' lives.
He said people's right to access information had been widely recognized as an essential pre-requisite for an effective and functional democracy. In Ghana, this is echoed in Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution which provides for every individual's right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society. This is, however, subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of the public interest in a democratic society. This will foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs, to contain corruption and to provide for related matters. The law places an obligation on public agencies and private bodies to provide to any person access to information and in response to a formal request received, in a timely, inexpensive and reasonable manner. Professor Kwame Karikari, Executive Director, Media Foundation for West Africa, expressed the hope that the dialogue series would create awareness on rights of individuals to health care. He said the right to information was vital for patients to know what was wrong.
Dr Edmund Delle, President of CAPSDH, said the dialogue was to create a platform for human rights and health advocates to begin the process of sharing experiences; to stimulate the creation of collaborative networks for research, education, communication and advocacy; and strengthen national solidarity among people working in health and human rights fields. 13 Nov. 09"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"360"	2009-11-09	"Accra, Nov. 9, GNA - The Right to Information Coalition (RTI) on Monday commended government for its commitment to pass the bill into law by the end of the year.
In an interview with the Ghana News Agency in Accra, Nana Oye Lithur, Convener, RTI Coalition of Ghana, said the clear timeframe by Government was an indication that Ghana would set the pace for other West African nations to emulate. Nana Oye said people's right to access information had been widely recognized as an essential pre-requisite for an effective and functional democracy.
In Ghana, this is echoed in Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution which provides for every individual's right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society. She said the RTI was therefore an Act to provide for the implementation of the constitutional right to information held by a public agency and a private body.
This is subject to exemptions that are necessary and consistent with the protection of the public interest in a democratic society. This will foster a culture of transparency and accountability in public affairs, to contain corruption and to provide for related matters. Nana Oye said: \"This law places an obligation on public agencies and private bodies to provide to any person access to information and in response to a formal request received, in a timely, inexpensive and reasonable manner.\"
She said the Coalition in collaboration with the African Commission of Health and Human Rights Promoters (CAPSDH) had set November 12 for engagement with health professionals.
The November dialogue on the theme: \"Hippocratic Oath within the Framework of the Right to Information,\" seeks to create a platform for health professionals and human rights activists to have a diagnosis of the oath and scrutinize the RTI bill under the microscope, which will set the pace for combining health knowledge with knowledge of law and ethics. Speakers will be Mr Akoto Ampaw, Executive Member of the Right to Information Coalition of Ghana, officials of the Ghana Medical Association, Ghana Bar Association, Ghana Registered Nurses Association, Korle Bu Teaching Hospital, Police Hospital, 37 Military Hospital, Ghana AIDS Commission and Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice. Other discussants will be from Ministry of Health, Ministry of Information, Attorney General and Ministry of Justice, Ghana Journalists Association, International Federation of Women Lawyers (FIDA-Ghana), Judicial Service, Ridge Hospital, and RTI Coalition. It will be chaired by Professor Kwame Karikari of the Media Foundation for West Africa. In an interview Dr Edmund Delle, President of CAPSDH, said the dialogue was to create a platform for human rights and health advocates to begin the process of sharing experiences; to stimulate the creation of collaborative networks for research, education, communication and advocacy; and strengthen national solidarity among people working in health and human rights fields. He said deliberations from the monthly dialogue would be published in CAPSDH's monthly newsletter, which would serve as educational and resource material for the public. CAPSDH is a non-governmental organization dedicated to the defence and promotion of the ideas enshrined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights. 9 Nov. 09"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"361"	2009-05-31	"Accra, June 1, GNA - Media Foundation for West Africa (MFWA) on Monday commended government for showing commitment in the passage of the Right to Information bill.
\"MFWA is happy that after a long delay in the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill, there appears to be hope on the horizon as the Bill is being considered by cabinet for onward transmission to parliament,\" statement issued in Accra stated. The MFWA is a regional independent, non-profit, non-governmental organization based in Accra. It was founded in 1997 to defend and promote the rights and freedom of the media and all forms of expression.
The statement said RTI would encourage accountability through transparency and \"is the most prominent expression of a profound national commitment to ensuring an open Government.\" \"At the heart of that commitment is the idea that accountability is in the interest of Government and citizens alike\". The statement acknowledged recent review of the bill by the government statute law review commissioner, and said there was the need to ensure that the bill would conform to international best practise when passed into law.
The statement identified international best standards that include maximum disclosure, the obligation to publish, limited scope of exceptions, user-friendly access procedures; limited costs; open meetings; overriding disclosure principle; promotion of open government and protection of whistleblowers.
Mr Ebo Barton-Oduro, the Deputy Minister of Justice and Attorney General, was recently quoted as saying: \"The time for the enactment of the RTI Bill is now\", and \"that the government is determined to pass the Bill into law within the shortest possible time\". The Deputy Minister stated that the government acknowledged the people's right to access information as an essential prerequisite for an effective and functional democracy as stipulated in Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana.
MFWA as a member of the RTI coalition said it could not agree more with the minister's assertion as the passage of the Bill would not only consolidate the gains made in advancing democracy but also strategically place Ghana as a beacon of democracy on the African continent, the statement stated."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"362"	2009-05-14	"Accra, May 15, GNA - Mr. Ebo Barton-Oduro, Deputy Minister of Justice and Attorney General on Friday said the Right to Information (RTI) Bill has been laid before Cabinet for the necessary action for onward submission to Parliament.
\"The time for the enactment of the RTI Bill is now, and in conformity with the Government's commitment to deepening transparency, accountability and good governance, it is determined to pass the Bill into law within the shortest possible time,\" the Deputy Minister stated in Accra.
He was speaking at the launch of Ghana Integrity Initiative (GII) Advocacy and Legal Advice Centre (ALAC) on the theme: \"Helping the People to Address Corruption in Ghana.\" It was chaired by Dr. Audrey Gadzekpo of School of Communication Studies, University of Ghana. The Deputy Minister said the Government acknowledged the peoples' right to access information as an essential prerequisite for an effective and functional democracy as echoed in Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana.
Mr Barton-Oduro commended the effort of civil society groups for championing the crusade for the passage of the Bill, stressing that the ruling National Democratic Congress (NDC) considered the collaboration as a positive indication for progress.
He said poor information management system and record keeping were obstacles which may hinder the smooth implementation of the law and called for action by all stakeholders.
Mr Barton-Oduro also outlined government's efforts at fighting corruption and measures to strengthen the legal framework which included addressing the gap in the Whistleblower's Act, the Procurement Law and the Financial Administration Law, among others.
He said the government was in the process of introducing new bills before Parliament of ensure that loopholes in existing financial regulatory laws were sealed, especially in the real estate and car dealing industries which were bedevilled with money laundering. In an interview with the Ghana News Agency, Nana Oye Lithur, a member of the RTI Coalition, while acknowledging the recent review of the bill by the Government Statute Law Commission, \"in our view, there are still critical needs for further review to render the Bill in line with international best practice standards\".
She said although the current Bill tried to comply with some of these principles, there were still certain provisions that fell short of the standards hence the need for the critical review when it finally got to parliament.
Nana Oye said these standards as espoused by the United Nations includes maximum disclosure, the obligation to publish, limited scope of exceptions; user-friendly access procedures; limited costs; open meetings; overriding disclosure principle; promotion of open government and protection of whistleblowers. She explained that, although the Bill contained a general right of access to information by the public, \"this is limited in scope to information in the custody or control of a Government agency and not private bodies.
\"This in effect underrates the desired impact of the law by limiting it to a mere segment of public bodies and disregarding the integrated nature of public and private bodies in undertaking public service functions.\" Nana Oye said the underlying rationale was that whereas public and private bodies rendered public functions, people had no direct claim to information from the private sector save for that needed to enforce a legal right.
Meanwhile, Mr Vitus Azeem, Executive Secretary of GII, described the apparent delay in the passage of the RTI Law as a major constraint in the fight against corruption. He urged the government to pass the law in fulfilment of its campaign commitment to pass RTI law, and commended the government for its demonstration of good faith in passing the bill. On the issues of corruption, Mr Azeem said Ghana had improved her standing on the perception of corruption index, placing 67 in 2008 as against 69 in 2007 out of 180 countries sampled in both years. He said the country also scored 3.9 on the Corruption Perception Index in 2008 as compared to 3.7 last year. \"thus for three consecutive years Ghana has inched up steadily on the perception of corruption\". Mr Azeem commended government for creating the enabling environment and supporting anti-corruption initiatives, which have played significant role in the improved score. He said pronouncements by President John Evans Atta Mills and Vice President John Dramani Mahama about what government was doing to curb corruption had sent strong signals to the international world of the country's determination to fight corruption."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"363"	2009-05-10	" ….. Problem is, up till now, the Mills/Rawlings/NDC crew has failed see the most important FOI-bill-linkage. They have not talked about linking the FOI bill to the Asset Declaration law. Won’t the reader agree that a FOI-Asset Declaration linkage is truly the most expedient road to take considering Mr. Mills is telling us day after day that he is interested in accountability, transparency, and good governance?.... The other big question is why Mr. Rawlings is totally mum on the FOI bill? Does Mr. Rawlings recognize that this a fundamental test of the NDC, compared to exposition of abstract theories about land reform in foreign lands when he is not using the other side of his mouth to tell Prof Mills that Chiefs and the military must also fall under the purview of the FOI law (Prof Lungu, 8 May 09)….
 Recent revelations in the British and Ghanaian press show the remarkable promise of the Freedom of Information (FOI) bill. We now know that Mr. Gordon Brown who recently hosted Prof Mills in London, and other UK officials, may not have been all that truthful and accurate with their public expenses over the years, thanks to a FOI request. In fact, according the BBC, “full details of all MPs' expenses dating back four years, running to 2.4 million receipts,” will be published in July under the UK “Freedom of Information” law.
 With respect to Ghana, it appears the people will need the FOI bill to find out for sure what the Mills administration has squandered when he allowed extra people on the trip, some of whom over-stayed British funding. Notable is the fact that this “Junketing and Party-Here, Party-There” brouhaha is being instigated by the people at the Statesman paper, who it appears, have conveniently chosen to ignore telling the people how much Mr. Kuffour and his crew blew on all those junkets and “Party-Here, Party-There” per diems all those 8 years. But we digress!
 This paper is about passing a strong FOI bill to allow the people to dig to the bottom of such cases. You see, dear reader, while we’ve been in travel status the past 3 weeks in the States, we’ve been dismayed by news reaching us about “efforts” by the Mills/Rawlings/NDC crew to “pass” the Freedom of Information bill. First came the “worries” expressed by the Majority Leader, Mr. Alban Bagbin, (with some side-kick shots by the Minority Leader, Mr. Osei-Kyei Mensah-Bonsu), that the Mills administration is taking too long to pass the FOI bill. (Why the Majority Leader and Parliament cannot act is baffling, frankly). Next came reports the Mill/Rawlings NDC is on a super-fast-track to passing the FOI bill, after all. But our analyses show Mr. Mills must be thinking the people are asleep, dumb, or crazy to allow Kilimanjaro-sized-loopholes and broad categorical exclusions in the FOI law. (Looks like the NDC has taken the dud of the Joe Ghartey/NPP draft bill left behind in the looted government drawers, bungalows, and public accounts a few short months ago and are polishing it as their own).
 In fact, we’ve been so aghast by the Kilimanjaro-sized-loopholes that we are now concluding that as far as the FOI bill is concerned, the best and most important development since Prof Mills took over the administration is the number of words uttered by so many officials. The Information and Justice Ministers come to mind. So does Mr. Bagbin with his talk about the NDC swiftly passing the FOI bill long before the first vote was cast in the last elections. Yes, there has been a lot of words and talk from the NDC. However, what is now staring Ghanaians in the face is a Mugabe-type RTI bill with so many loopholes it will not be worth the ink and paper the bill will be written on. This is deplorable!
 Here are 4 reasons why we say what we say:
 1. For a Mills administration that came to power proclaiming transparency and accountability, and with all the talk about enacting the FOI bill, we are bothered that they have not already set up a website dedicated to the FOI bill. What, we ask, is so hard about quickly setting up a FOI website for the people given all the good governance talk?
 2. Shockingly, we are told that Mr. Mills wants to ask all persons requesting information under the law to wait 70 days before the relevant government official is compelled to act. Is Mills joking? Is he serious? Do they understand that 70 days is 20% of an entire year? Why, we ask, does an “information officer” require 21 days to “consider” a FOI request, 14 days to produce the information, and 35 additional days, if the information officer does not “feel” like giving out the information?
 In practical terms, why must it take a Ghanaian official 70 days to tell a FOI requester why a person got a government bungalow, why others were disqualified; how many people were considered for university admission, what scores the “lucky ones had, which regions they hailed from; how much was collected in taxes on a vehicle imported into the country by the a politician, compared to the same vehicle imported by Ms/Mr. Janeakos/Kwazofi Ghanaba? Why must it take Ghanaian officials 70 days to tell the people how much was paid to Minister X when the Minister travelled overseas, or how much was paid to a “foreign” agent to represent Ghana in London or the UK, why, and who else was considered for the task order/contract?
 3. Equally unnerving is the issue of broad categorical exemptions to protect all manner of corrupt officials. Why does the Mills administration want to exempt the military, the security services, and the chieftaincy institution from the FOI law? What is the point?  Is Mr. Mills saying those institutions are so important that public employees and stewards of public resources within cannot cheat, steal, lie, or otherwise break laws that a FOI request can assist in exposing, and/or arresting?  Why must Mills and the NDC try to invent here? Should not FOI exemption depend on the case, and not on the governmental function?
 Our position is this: The FOI law should apply to all agencies, services, and quasi-public organizations in which the people of Ghana have any interests, however small. This would certainly include the military, the security services, and the chieftaincy institution.
 4. We will tell Mr. Mills and his team that while they are talking a lot, they are exposing their behinds and showing the people that they may actually lack the foresight, Ghana-centeredness, and sense of leadership on this matter. Polishing the NPP draft is not good enough. More important, up to this point, the Mills/Rawlings/NDC crew have failed see the most important FOI-bill-linkage. They have not talked about linking the FOI bill to the Asset Declaration law. Won’t the reader agree a FOI-Asset Declaration linkage is trully the most expedient road to take considering Mr. Mills is telling us day after day that he is interested in accountability, transparency, and good governance?
 The other big question is why Mr. Rawlings is totally mum on the FOI bill? Does Mr. Rawlings recognize that this a fundamental test of the NDC, compared to exposition of abstract theories about land reform in foreign lands when he is not using the other side of his mouth to tell Prof Mills that Chiefs and the military must also fall under the purview of the FOI law.
 In conclusion, we have argued on these pages over the years that there is nothing for Ghanaian officials to invent when it comes to the FOI law. FOI laws and its institutional processes pre-date the birth of Ghana. The people must ask for a strong Ghana-centered FOI law that will truly hold government officials accountable and promote good governance as a result. Thirty (30) days is long enough for Ghanaian officials to provide answers to FOI question, if the administration is smart and sets up a website to collect, collate, store, and serve FOI responses. No agency or institution has a right to be exempt under the law, unless Mr. Mills wants to tell us he has been joking and does not know what he’s been telling us the past 5 months.
 It is time Mr. Rawlings spent some of his People-Guaranteed-Capital on this Ghana-centered fight!
 3 NOTES: 1. Special thanks and appreciation must go Ghanaweb.com for putting the Ghana FOI/RTI bill law up-front on its pages and “editorial” agenda.
 2. Visit www.GhanaHero.com for more Ghana-centered information and ideas about the FOI program. While there, send is email from a copy of the hit MP3 release, FOIB.
 3. To get up to speed on the Ghana FOI fight visit www.GhanaHero.com; www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/features/columnist.php?S=Prof Lungu; www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/features/columnist.php?S=Lungu, Prof.
 © 2 May 2009, Prof Lungu, Minneapolis, MN, USA."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"364"	2009-05-03	" Accra, May 4, GNA - The leadership of the legislature on Monday gave indications of their approval for the passage of the Right to Information law and called on the executive to lay the bill before the House.
 Mr Alban Bagbin, Majority Leader and Mr Osei-Kyei Mensah-Bonsu, Minority Leader, expressed concern about the delay of the executive in presenting the RTI Bill to Parliament over the past seven years. \"The Executive should present the bill to us in its current form, we as the peoples' representatives will take it and consult people and other stakeholders to ensure that it conforms to international best practice,\" Mr Bagbin stated in Accra as the world celebrates World Press Freedom Day.
 The two leaders were speaking during a panel discussion on the topic: \"Elections: An Essential Element of a Democratic Society,\" organised by the National Commission for Civic Education (NCCE) as part of the 9th Annual National Constitution Week Celebration.
 The Majority Leader said: \"As the legislative arm of Government the 1992 Constitution restraints us, we cannot do anything about the Bill until it is laid before us.the Constitution empowers the executive - President - as the \"only\" body to lay a bill before Parliament.\"
 Responding to the accusation that parliamentarians did not participate in the National Constitution Week celebrations, Mr Bagbin called for closer collaboration between the NCCE and Parliament. The Majority Leader called on the government to build a Democracy House, where all the Independent Governance Institutes (IGI) could be accommodated.
 Mr Bagbin expressed concern about the lack of official accommodation for the NCCE, which continues to squat at the premises of the Electoral Commission.
 Mr Mensah-Bonsu said: \"The RTI Bill has been in the oven for too long, it's now time to bring out and parliament is ready to partner the executive for the passage of the Bill.\"
 He also supported calls for strengthening of democratic institutions including the NCCE and the Commission for Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) to play their effective roles in entrenching good governance.
 The Minority Leader called for financial autonomy of IGI, stressing the need to streamline allocation of resources to these institutions. \"I found it difficult to understand why last year the Electoral Commission collected about GH¢420,000 for HIV/AIDS education. This year again allocation has been made to the EC for HIV/AIDS education, while the NCCE was left out,\" Mr Mensah-Bonsu said.
 He also challenged officials of the NCCE to uphold the political independence of the Commission. \"I can stand for the chairman but there are some officials whose political biases are unacceptable.\" Mr Laary Farhan Bimi, NCCE Chairman, called for the strengthening of democratic institutions to perform their civic roles, \"as they hold the key for entrenching democracy in the country\".
 Mr Bimi expressed concern about the poor budgetary allocation to the NCCE for its operation, which had prevented the celebration of the Constitution Week at the regional level. 4 May 09"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"365"	2009-04-15	"Accra, April 16, GNA - The Government has intensified discussion on the Right to Information (RTI) Bill as an affirmation of its commitment to ensure its passage into law, the Minister of Information, Mrs Sabah Zita Okaikoi stated in Accra on Thursday.
The Government's initiatives include dialogue between Ministry of Justice and Attorney General, and Ministry of Information with the Ghana Coalition on the Right to Information, mandating legal expert to examine the Bill and its accompanying critique.
Mrs. Okaikoi, who was speaking at the launch of the African Media Barometer report, the first home-grown analysis of the media landscape in Africa focusing on Ghana urged non-state actors and media practitioners to improve upon the media landscape.
She called for collaboration with stakeholders to pave the way for an even more vibrant, independent and professional media in the country. The African Media Barometer is a self assessment exercise done by Africans themselves according to home-grown criteria, which is the first in-depth and comprehensive description and measurement system for national media environment on the African continent. The benchmarks for the 26 Countries are to a large extent taken from the African Commission for Human and Peoples Rights, Declaration of Principles on Freedom of Expression in Africa. Mrs. Okaikoi, who launched the report commended the Friedrich Ebert Stiftung for supporting the project.
Mr. Ransford Tetteh, President of the Ghana Journalists Association (GJA) who reviewed the report said the overall verdict of the report indicates the increasing recognition of the media's role in nurturing Ghana's democracy. He said the report tasked the National Media Commission and the Ghana Journalists Association to do more to enforce regulations on the code of ethics of the journalism profession.
Mr Tetteh said the report cited the inability of the NMC to summon media houses to comply to its code as a weakness and called for the strengthening of the NMC.
The GJA President acknowledged that although some public information can be assessed, no public official can be compelled to release information they consider confidential and therefore not for public consumption. \"Lack of information hinders public discourse and the empowerment of the people to hold public office holders accountable for their actions,\" he said.
He therefore urged the government to speed up the passage of the Right to Information Bill and the Broadcasting Bill to deepen the frontiers of the media freedom.
Mr. Tetteh appealed to journalists to respect regulatory bodies such as NMC and the Ethics and Disciplinary Council of the GJA to ensure that the media lived up to professional and ethic standards. \"The integrity of the media will be at stake if the practitioners do not respect the code of ethics,\" Mr Tetteh stated. The main part of the report was based on qualitative assessment of the media landscape according to a set of indicators, which includes Freedom of expression, Freedom of the Media, the media landscape broadcasting regulations and media practice."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"366"	2009-04-10	" A GNA feature by Francis Ameyibor
 Accra, April 8, GNA - The 1992 Constitution guarantees the Right to Information as a fundamental human right of all persons in Ghana. But it is a sad commentary that almost 16 years into the Fourth Republic, the various governments and parliaments have failed to ensure the passage of the Right to Information Law.
 It is more frustrating for media practitioners in their quest to secure information for the benefit of the public in fulfilment of their Constitutional mandate to encounter public officials who refuse to give out what they are holding in trust for the people. In Ghana, everybody seems to be interested in withholding information, whether classified or not, research findings or just newspaper cuttings. We are interested in keeping documents in our safes and cabinets to gather dust instead of releasing them. It is completely unjustifiable in this information age that public officials do not provide the public with access to the huge amounts of valuable information that they produce as part of the routine discharge of their duties.
 Such officials need to be told that they do not own the information that they create and collect. Information belongs to the public - it is created with public money by public servants, paid from the public treasury. It is a national resource. Our choice of democratic governance entails an active participation by all in the governance of the country. In this participatory democracy, the right to information is particularly relevant. It is essential in ensuring good governance.
 It is only when those who are to participate in governance are well informed, that they can contribute meaningfully to governance. This can only be achieved if they have access to the relevant information. Thus right to information requires that there is in existence the requisite data or information.
 This realisation of the importance of the right to information and the desire to ensure that there is transparency in governance, constitutes the foundation for empowering the citizenry to contribute to the good governance and rapid development and progress of the country. The right to information, however, needs to be qualified in accordance with the Constitution.
 The primary conceptual foundation for the right of citizens to information is the principle of sovereignty of the people. It is in this regard that the very first article and provision of the 1992 Constitution - Article 1 Clause 1 affirms the sovereignty of the people in these immortal words:
 \"The sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of Ghana in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of government are to be exercised in the manner and within the limits laid down in this Constitution,\" Article 1(1)\".
 The right to information is an important mechanism for securing social justice and the rights of the people.
 In an interview with Ghana News Agency at Sunyani during the recent regional workshop on the RTI Bill, Mr Akoto Ampaw, a member of the Ghana Bar Association (GBA), said it was the obligation of government generally to be proactive in disclosing information to its citizens without waiting for any specific request.
 He explained that in a democratic dispensation, the government was simply an elected and mandated agent, the representative of the people. \"It ought to be obvious that any information in the hands of governmental agencies or public bodies is by that very fact information that is held for and on behalf of the people by that government agency or body.\"
 Mr Ampaw said the right to information assures and enhances probity and accountability, two very important principles that the 1992 Constitution upholds both in its preamble and in various provisions scattered in the body of the Constitution. A memorandum to the Bill categorizes it into two broad subject areas, the first area dealing with information held by government agencies, and the second area with general and miscellaneous matters. Clause 1 provides for access to official information held by a government agency. Except for information specified as exempt information, a person has a right of access to information held by government agencies and does not need to give a reason for the request for access, unless that person requests that the application be treated with urgency.
 Maximum disclosure in relation to governance is provided for in Clause 2 which requires the Government to make non-exempt information on governance available to the public without the need of an application. This provision is meant to ensure transparency in Government and to equip the public with the necessary knowledge and information to contribute meaningfully to national development. This provision and indeed any other mandatory provisions may, like any of the provisions of the Constitution on fundamental human rights, be enforced through an action at the High Court as specified in Article 33 of the Constitution.
 The compilation and publication of an up-to-date manual on official information, at the instance of every Minister in consultation with the Public Services Commission and the Head of Civil Service, is covered by Clause 3.
 Clause 4 requires the Public Services Commission in consultation with the Minister responsible for the implementation of the Act to provide guidelines for the preparation of the manual under Clause 2 of the Bill.
 The Attorney-General will be responsible for the implementation of the Act and any other enactment that relates to access to official information in the custody of an agency.
 Exemptions are provided for in Clauses 5 and 6(a) from disclosure of information submitted or meant for submission to the President or the Vice President.
 A certificate signed by the Secretary to the President or the Vice President establishes whether or not information that relates to the office of the President or the Vice President is exempt, and is only subject to article 135 of the Constitution from disclosure of information submitted or meant for submission to the Cabinet and official information of the Cabinet which has not been published or released to the public, as well as decisions, deliberations and discussions of the Cabinet.
 Subject to Article 135 of the Constitution a certificate signed by the Secretary to the Cabinet establishes whether information that relates to the Cabinet is exempt or not. In spite of the exemption from disclosure of information relating to the Cabinet, the Cabinet has the power to grant access to information relating to its work. This is another provision intended to enhance transparency in governance.
 Clause 7 exempts information that relates to law enforcement, public safety and national security from disclosure. This provision is necessary for the protection of national security, public order and public health.
 Clauses 8, 9 and 10 provide, among other things, for the exemption from disclosure of information that is likely to damage or prejudice the relationship between this country and any other countries or an international organization, the defence of the country or of a friendly foreign country, and its economic or financial interest. Clause 11 exempts from disclosure confidential information which would reveal a trade secret or which relates to research, scientific, technical or commercial subjects or to labour where the disclosure of the information would prejudice the economic or financial interests of a person or group of persons.
 In Clause 12, provision is made for the exemption from disclosure of information obtained on a tax return or for the purpose of determining tax liability, whiles Clauses 11 and 12 together protect the rights of third parties in respect of information held by government agencies, which affects the interests of the third parties. Other issues captured in the Bill include the responsibility of the Minister in respect of access; exempt information - information from the Office of the President and of the Vice-President; Information relating to the Cabinet, Information relating to law enforcement, public safety and national security;   Information affecting international relations and Information that affects the defence of the country.
 Other exemptions cover economic and any other interests; economic information of third parties; information relating to tax; Internal working information of agencies; Parliamentary privilege, fair trial, contempt of court; Legal profession and any other privilege under law; Medical professional privilege; Disclosure of personal matters and disclosure for the protection of the public interest.
 The Bill also makes procedure for access which focuses on the application for access to information; person to deal with application; transfer of application; deferred access; decision on application; information that cannot be found or not in existence; payment of advance deposit; extension of time to deal with an application; refusal to process for failure to pay deposit; refusal of access and manner of access.
 Other aspects are amendment of personal records in custody of an agency; application for amendment of information; dealing with an application to amend records; incomplete applications; action on application to amend record; refusal to amend records; notice of decision and notations to be added to records. Internal reviews and appeals internal review by the Minister; action by the Minister; decision of the Minister on review; delegation of power by the Minister; application for judicial review; application to the Supreme Court for judicial review; powers of the Supreme Court; ruling of the Supreme Court and right to a lawyer or any other expert are also captured.
 General and miscellaneous provisions focus on burden of proof; appointment of information officers; protection in respect of certain criminal actions; fees and charges of agency; waiver of fee on basis of financial hardship; fees and charges not part of the Consolidated Fund; responsibility of the Attorney-General and Attorney-General as a party to proceedings.
 The rest are annual reports by agencies; report by the Attorney-General to Parliament; limitation of period for exempt information; information held by the national archives, museums and libraries; application of Act to existing and future information; offence of disclosure of exempt information; other offences; extension of time; application to the private sector and other regulations."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"367"	2009-03-29	" Recent statements by several officials informing Ghanaians that the Mills administration will pass the access to information bill are getting a bit stale and confusing. It is a tad stale and confusing when some Mills administration officials, instead of calling the law the Freedom of Information (FOI) bill, ignorantly refer to it as the Right to Information (RTI) bill. In fact, it is so confusing a recent report from GNA (Ghanaweb, 18 Mar) could not decide whether to call the law RTI or RIB. On that one, we will tell you that the only RIB we like to hear about is BBQ Rib.
 But we digress!
 A few days ago, Mrs. Betty Mould-Iddrisu, the Attorney-General, added to the utter confusion and desolation when she attempted to lecture the FOI bill coalition in Accra. It sounded as if Betty wants to tell us she knows best when it comes to the public’s access to information held by the Government of Ghana in the name of the people in the first place.
 We are here using our sacred electronic ink to convey to Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu to pipe down some, and listen. We are also here to humbly ask the Ghana FOI coalition to re-orient their effort to passage of a stronger “Freedom of Information” bill for Ghana. We all got to dance to the same tune and music, don’t we? And don’t we all prefer a “Freedom” dance, versus a “Right” dance?
 Our position, stated more than once, is this: the access to information bill is a Freedom of Information (FOI) bill, period! In fact, we will venture that the reader will agree with us 101% of the time that Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu and Prof Mills will both select “Freedom” over a “Right” that a government can take away any time.
 In strategic and Ghana-centered terms, we think that by directing the proposed law be called the Freedom of Information (FOI) bill, the Mills administration would be setting themselves far apart from the deposed NPP crew. Remember that it is the NPP administration that failed to commit to, and begin institutionalize a more transparent and accountable government of the people. The NPP certainly talked a lot about the “access to information” law. But all they did was propose a Kilimanjaro-sized, loophole-laden dud of a draft RTI bill. (Is that what the NDC is up to?).  Should we now start thinking that maybe, just maybe, the Mills administration and officials like Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu love to jive when it comes to the Freedom of Information bill, just like the NPP.
 Consider how unfortunate it was to hear Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu talk and operate just like the like the NPP; (1) the so-called Right to Information bill “…came with a cost to the taxpayer…” and would be very expensive for Ghanaians, as it is for the UK, (2) the law will be administrated and controlled by our dear Mrs. Betty Mould-Iddrisu, the Attorney-General, herself; (3) the Attorney-General (our dear Betty) will determine who gets access to information held by government.
 Say what, Prof Mills? Is this your plan for the FOI bill or is Betty just jiving?
 ITEM: We think that it is illogical and silly for Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu to compare the Ghanaian situation to the UK’s without offering any data to back up her pet jive. How much does she estimate corruption and lack of access by Ghanaians to public information cost Ghanaians? Does Betty understand that anything worth constructing costs money? And if Betty likes to compare Ghana to the UK and the US, where does she get the idea that she, as the Attorney General, deserves to wield all the power to enforce the laws of Ghana, in addition to enforcing the FOI law, and deciding who in Ghana will get access to information controlled by a government that she is a member?
 Goodness grief! Do Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu and the current crop of NDC officials want to listen to the people or do they prefer to lecture the people the way teachers they do in Ghana’s universities and secondary schools?  (We hope not!).
 Before we close, here are six (6) questions for Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu and Prof. Mills to chew on while Betty is in her jiving mood:
 1. What is preventing you from posting on a dedicated website the NPP draft, the new NDC draft, and the final draft of the FOI bill proposed for the Parliament of Ghana? (Why must all of that be a secret, if you are for truly in favor of transparency?).
 2. What is preventing you from asking the people to share their concerns, knowledge, and expertise on the FOI law?
 3. Why is there currently a poverty of vision regarding funding of the FOI bill? Don’t you see it as a very special law that the people will gladly lend their full faith and credit to secure loans, grants, and even approve a dedicated tax?  Have you sat down to think of how many countries, individuals, agencies, and organizations will contribute to the Ghana FOI law institution if your administration was sincere in what you are now yapping about, or is it all jive?
 4.  Why do you think that you are smarter than the British and the US who have a far better record on access to information laws? What makes you think that your legal minds are far superior, that you can improve on those world standards?
 5. Relatedly, what is preventing you from publishing (posting on a dedicated webpage) all the signed NPP contracts and Memorandums of Agreements for oil, transportation, electricity, etc, if you are truly interested in governing transparently and accountably?
 6. Why are you still hiding Chinenry Hesse Committee report on the ex-gratia awards considering you tell us every day that you are all for transparency and accountability?
 ITEM: YES, we agree with Mr Akoto Ampaw when he tells the Mills administration to institute “an independent Commission to ensure enforcement of the law in line with international best practice standard.” We will also tell Prof Mills and Mrs. Mould-Iddrisu that there are no “two Ghana-ways” about that, unless they want a sham of an access to information bill. That would by a mighty shame and waste of our precious time.
 3 NOTES:
 1.  www.GhanaHero.com is the only website dedicated to passage of the Freedom of Information (FOI) bill for Ghana.  Visit www.GhanaHero.com and read more about the Freedom of Information bill.
 2. Visit www.GhanaHero.com and request you very own copy of “FOIB – Are You Pickable, Mr. Politician,” the highly danceable educational  MP3 recording composed and performed by Prof Lungu to support passage of the FOIB in Ghana.
 3.  FOIB – Are You Pickable, Mr. Politician?  (FOIB - Are Ghanaians lawyer’s articulated to this national requirement?).
 © Prof Lungu, Okinawa, Japan, 25 March 2009."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"368"	2009-03-24	"Sunyani, March 24, GNA - A lawyer on Tuesday noted that the passage of the Right to Information (RTI) Bill into law would serve as a bulwark against corruption and arbitrariness, which would secure social justice and the rights of the people.
Mr Akoto Ampaw, who is also a member of the RTI Coalition, told the Ghana News Agency in an interview that the passage of the RTI Bill would give voices to the people to participate in shaping society thereby promoting consolidation of democracy.
He said the Bill sought to promote socio-economic interest, define rules for settling conflicting claims and interest in ways that were beneficial to society in general. He, therefore, called on civil society advocates, democratic stakeholders, media practitioners, traditional authorities and government functionaries to study the tenets of the Bill and input into discussions leading to its passage.
Mr Ampaw explained that the Bill sought empowerment for members and society at large through effective citizenship to check excesses of public functionaries and hold them accountable to the people. The GBA member, who led a team of RTI Coalition members to organize a series of regional workshops in Sunyani and Kumasi to empower the public to make inputs into the bill, said the coalition sought to work to ensure the passage of a good RTI law that met international human rights norms than to rush and have a mutilated bill passed into law, which then became a serious obstacle to the right of the citizens to information. Mr Ampaw pointed out that governments worldwide were never in any great hurry to pass a right to information law that provided for maximum disclosure and fully gave legislative force to the right to information. \"It is thus necessary, if we are to have an expansive right to information legislation that we generate the active involvement of civil society and their organizations so that the necessary mass pressure can be brought to bear on the government and the legislature to assure a right to information legislation that measures up to international standards and best practices.\"
Mr Ampaw also noted that the right to information went hand-in-hand with proper systems of record keeping and efficiency in administration. \"RIT law therefore has the potential of giving impetus to the efficient and effective record keeping in our polity.\" He said in spite of the major reservation of the Ghana Coalition on the Right to Information about the current state of the Bill, it wanted the government to place it before parliament without further delay and that the necessary amendments would be made to it to make it worthy of Ghanaians' struggle for democracy, freedom and justice.
Nana Oye Lithur, Africa Regional Coordinator of the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative Office in Accra, said the RTI bill was derived from the conceptual and constitutional foundations of Article 21 (1) (f).
The regional workshops led to the formation of Ashanti and Brong Ahafo Regional Branches of the Coalition on the Right to Information to serve as regional vanguard for the propagation of the tenets of the Bill to ensure that majority of Ghanaians participate in the process leading to the passage of the Bill."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"369"	2009-02-27	"Accra, Feb. 27, GNA - The Ninth Annual Constitution Week activities commence on April 28 to give Ghanaians an opportunity to the public to participate in discussions, debates and theatre performances to ensure that the tenets of the 1992 Constitution become a living document for attainment of good governance.
\"The outcome of Election 2008 dictates that every Ghanaian enlarged
his or her knowledge and information base of the spirit and tenets of the 1992 Constitution for attainment of national cohesion for accelerated growth and sustenance of democracy and constitutionalism in the country,\" Mrs. Augustina Akosua Akumanyi, Deputy Chairperson of the National Commission for Civic Education (NCCE), said on Friday during discussions with a delegation of the Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI). \"There is an urgent need to create an increased and sustained interest of all in the evolving democratic dispensation for achievement of social and political stability for national unity and development,\" she said. The RTI Coalition delegation led by Mr. Francis Ameyibor called on the NCCE to initiate the process for adopting Access to Information as the revolving theme for this year's Constitution Week celebration. Mrs. Akumanyi, who welcomed the idea noted that the notion that the constitution was a document for the educated few, especially lawyers, should be removed from the minds of Ghanaians. She said the institution of the annual Constitution Week in 2001 was a bid to demystify and make it comprehensible for all to appreciate their respective duties and obligation irrespective of political affiliation and ideology.
Mr Ameyibor described the NCCE as the largest and most potent civic advocacy institution whose active participation in the crusade for the passage of the RTI Bill would greatly enhance and advance public understanding of the bill.
He explained that since the aim of the RTI Bill formed part of a national and international move to stamp out corruption, \"it's paramount for civic institutions to play an active role in the process leading to its promulgation through the creation of public awareness\". He said the RTI law would entrench greater transparency and accountability in public affairs, stressing that the underlying factor in the Bill was the need to protect the safety and integrity of the State and the privacy of individuals. Mr Ameyibor therefore debunked the notion that the Bill was a media weapon to attack public officials and expose them to public scrutiny, saying there was therefore an urgent need to intensify public education on the Bill. He explained that the Bill dealt with two broad subject areas, the first area dealing with information held by government agencies, and the second area with general and miscellaneous matters. Ms Florence Nakazibwe, a member of the RTI Coalition delegation, reiterated the urgent need for NCCE to play an active role in the crusade for the passage of the RTI Bill this year. The programme of activities for this year's Annual Constitution Week celebration starts with media briefing on April 22, to be followed by the main lecture on April 28. The role of security services in consolidating democracy would be given a boost with their involvement in the celebration through durbars for the Military, Police, Immigration, Fire, CEPS and Prison services."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"370"	2009-01-16	"Accra, Jan. 16, GNA - The Ghana Coalition on Access to Information (ATI) on Friday expressed disappointment about the \"lack of political will,\" by the former President John Agyekum Kufuor to pass the Right to Information (RTI) Bill.
The RTI Coalition has therefore challenged President John Evans Atta Mills' government to muster the political courage to pass the bill within the first 100 days in office.
In a statement signed by Nana Oye Lithur, RTI Co-ordinator, said: \"The past six years have shown a lack of political will by former President Kufuor's Government to deliver on its promise to pass the pending RTI Bill for Ghana.
\"It is hoped that the new Government's promise of change that underpinned its campaign agenda will translate into substantial action on the Bill and counteract the complacency of the former government with respect to the expedient passage of the RTI Bill.\" The RTI Coalition reminded President Atta Mills of his promise to pass the long-awaited RTI law as part of his vision to strengthen the nation's democratic practice and combat corruption in public offices. Nana Oye Lithur said the fundamental Right to Information was a Constitutional Right guaranteed to all persons under Article 21 (1) (f) of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana.
She said to date Ghana still had no legislative framework providing for means and procedures to exercise the right to information. \"In the absence of such a law, it means that the peoples' right to information is left at the mercy of government officials who withhold information in their custody from the public in disregard of the peoples' legal entitlement to such information.\" She said these practices in effect undermined the constitutionally cherished principles of democratic governance that represented the choice of governance in Ghana.
Nana Oye Lithur recounted that the Coalition, in the run-up to Election 2008, pressed for detailed and time-bound commitments for the passage of the RTI law from Presidential candidates. \"This successfully resulted in the incorporation of such commitments in party manifestoes. The NDC manifesto specifically highlighted on page 24 that; 'The new NDC government shall enact into law the Freedom of Information Bill to facilitate access to official information, buttressing their commitment to disclosures'\" The NDC Manifesto, like all other party manifestoes, was, however, silent on the timeframe as to when this commitment to pass the Bill would be fulfilled.
Given the history of government inaction on this issue, the Coalition has renewed its efforts to place freedom of information at the forefront of the political and social agenda. The Coalition called on the new Government to, as a matter of urgency, revise the FOI Bill in accordance with international human rights standards as a means to guarantee maximum disclosure of government-held information to the public.
This would further ensure the expedient passage of the Bill as a fundamental yardstick for the progressive realisation of the peoples' right to information in Ghana and a tool for strengthening the democratic values.
Nana Oye explained that the current Bill on the RTI was drafted by the Attorney-General's Department in 2003 with the aim of giving substance to the Constitutional provision by providing key steps for access to official information held by a government agency subject to the rights and freedoms of others and the public interest. 16 Jan. 09"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"371"	2008-09-23	"Accra, Sept. 24, GNA - Ghanaian journalists in collaboration with the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) and the Coalition on the Right to Information, on Wednesday, outlined activities to mark 2008 \"Right to Know (RTI) Day\", which falls on September 28. The activities include a public lecture, on Monday September 29, at the British Council, on the theme: \"Adopting the Right to Information Legislation in Ghana - Where are we?\" Distribution of RTI materials, media sensitisation and intensification of lobbying campaigns for the passage of the Right to Information Bill.
Speakers at the public lecture includes Professor Kwame Karikari, of Media Foundation for West Africa; Justice V. C. R. A. C. Crabbe, Government Special Commissioner on the Right to Information Bill; Ms. Katherine Bain, Programmes Manager, World Bank and Mr. Akoto Ampaw, Ghana Bar Association.
The rest are, Dr. Steve Manteaw, Director, ISODEC; Mr. Vitus Azeem, General Secretary, Ghana Integrity Initiative; Nana Oye Lithur, Regional Co-ordinator, CHRI and Mr. Al-Hassan Adams, Ghana Coalition against Water Privatisation.
The day commemorates a worldwide recognition of the right of every individual to know and access official information from governments and private bodies exercising a public function.
In an interview with the Ghana News Agency, Nana Oye said the 1992 Constitution provided that \"all persons have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society.\"
She observed that the absence of a specific law to outline how the right should be exercised means that public access to information is being violated.
Nana Oye said in 2002, Government issued its first draft Bill on the RTI and had since made several attempts to review it through consultations with civil society.
She noted that the delay in passing the bill raises serious questions about government's commitment.
\"It has been 16 years since the 1992 Constitution came into force and still, a law to operationalise the RTI has not been witnessed. \"As the nation reflects on the strides in the democratic practice of Ghana, guaranteeing the RTI as a tool of good governance should be seen as a benchmark to the process.\"
On behalf of the RTI Coalition, Nana Oye reiterated the call on Government to deliver on its pledges to pass the pending RTI Bill. She stressed: \"We challenge the Government to pass the RTI Bill as a lasting legacy.\""	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"372"	2008-07-07	" “...Mr. Stephen Asamoah Boateng, has stated that the major responsibility of staff of the Information Services Department (ISD), is to make known the achievements of the ruling government, especially, developmental projects...since the department was the mouthpiece, and communication tool, which sells and markets government’s development agenda, he would not hesitate to fire any staff…who would play adamant, and attempt to undermine the campaign of projecting the achievements of the (NPP) government...”(Unsourced, Ghanaweb, 27 June 08).
 “...What a waste! Here we go again. Attorney General Joe Ghartey is spinning wheels.  Mr. Joe Ghartey and the “drafers” are constructing Kilimanjaro-size rodent-loopholes in an effort to render the Ghana Freedom of Information (FOI) bill as worthless as today’s Zimbabwe dollar...Get a grip. There is a universal standard…don’t you know?...” (Prof Lungu, 26 June 08).
 ITEM:  One of the on-going paradoxes of the Ghanaweb forum is that everyone is for a responsible, accountable government. However, few people want to devote some ink to making that vision come true by stridently advocating and supporting a world-standard FOI bill for Ghana. That bill has now been caricatured by Mr. Joe Ghartey as a Right to Information (RTI) bill. Within the past week, we’ve read 4 significant reports on the FOI bill. Not even when Mr. Boateng uttered above infamous, threatening words against public employees who know the difference between propaganda and information did we see a hail of comments on Ghanaweb. But it is all about access to information, plain and simple. Then there was this other report that said that publicly-owned media is being used as propaganda in support of the NPP administration. You get the drift, right?
 Ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls, Joe’s bill is not a Freedom of Information bill. It will not mean a darn thing. It is a Mugabe version of a FOI bill. Girls and boys, gentlemen and ladies, let us articulate to this important item. Let us draw a line in the sand on the side the FOI bill, on the side of an accountable and responsible government. Can we take a minute to make pithy responsible comments of support just so Joe knows that you truly care? As it’s been said before (and we will say again), a RTI approach is too feeble for Ghana! Come out, Coalition! Be reflective, bold, proactive, and pragmatics even as Joe, Kufour, and Nana are taking all the time in the world to act. Respond to the dud of Joe’s RTI bill that Mr. Kufour is sponsoring. Quickly change identity while there is time. The Coalition for Freedom of Information Coalition (FOIC)! That ought to fit the bill. Misery, is FOIC not easier to say than RTIC any Akosombo Dam day (rain or dry)?
 ITEM: One reason Prof Lungu has dedicated www.GhanHero.com to the Ghana FOI effort is that we searched high and low and could not find a website dedicated to that important purpose. Believing that Ghana is bigger than that, that the FOI mechanism is an essential requirement for good governance in Ghana, we decided to put our money where our mouths are. We even produced a song – FOIB, Are You Pickable? In fact, we will go a step further. We will register another website with a new name along the lines we are suggesting on behalf of the Coalition and will even provide initial funding of the site. All we ask is that a responsible “official” of the RTI Coalition get in touch with us and express a serous interest. Visit www.Ghana.com if you must and send us an email with your name, stating your relationship to the Coalition. (We will not provide an email address here - we do not want junk email from Benin, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Liberia, or Ghana, for that matter. Ghanaweb, an email link is enough!).
 Which brings us to the next item! In the news this week was a statement by NPP’s Mr. Akufo-Addo informing us that “…if elected as President of Ghana, the passage of (RTI bill) would be fast-tracked within the early months of his administration…” Ms. Mercy Adede Bolus came out with, “It is about time - Thanks so much,” to which Yaw Adu-Otu replied, “…Don't be hoodwinked by electioneering gimmicks…” Nana Awenade chimed in with a request to be patient, noting that “It is true NPP controls the current government, but there are other equally important things to be done. Have faith and believe in Ghana...” Pray tell, Nana Awenade, what is more important than passage of a strong FOI bill now? And is corporate Ghana the property and parochial family trust of the NPP and their candidate? NOT, I dare say! (Others providing comments were Ignorant and liar Kan Dapaah, Mallam, OLIVER TWIST, FUTURE THINKER, joe @ach, and Ato Kwamena, all of 18 comments. Compare that to the “Kufuor Leaves For Egypt” report that garnered 147 comments within 24 hours).
 More important, the question for Mr. Akufo-Addo and the NPP is why Ghana has to wait until he is elected president before the NPP will pass the FOI bill for Ghana. Didn’t Nana Addo practically recruit Joe to that position? Why must it be so difficult for them to act on a FOI for Ghana in 2008? And has Ghana not seen this ruse before? Don’t Ghanaians remember how “Zero Tolerance for Corruption” was fast-tracked into “Corruption is Perception” by these same people?  Come again, sirs. Ask Joe to work harder! Ask Joe to quit constructing Kilimanjaro-size rodent-loopholes with that joke of a RTI bill that he now tells us must be “qualified in accordance with the 1992 Constitution.” How destitute of critical thinking and wasteful of our time!  We are smarter!
 In parting, here are 14 Ghana-centered principles on FOI that Mr. Ghartey, the Coalition, and others interested may find useful or supportive of their hope for, and attitude to this important item:
 1. Understand that it is your freedom, (not your Right) - Know that “Freedom” is inherent in the person, by virtue of the \"Being.\" A freedom is harder to take away from the person. Mugabe’s Zimbabwe has a RTI bill. But the United States and the UK have a FOI bill. There’s a difference.
 2. Historic orientation - To properly orient you, please recognize that Sweden passed the world's first Freedom of Information Act in 1766.
 3. No quack inventers wanted (none need to apply) - From 2 above, Ghanaian “drafters” and Mr. Ghartey have nothing to invent when it comes to “drafting” a strong Ghana-centered FOI Act/Bill/Law.
 4. Access to information for everyone - Anyone can request information, regardless of nationality, profession, or domicile. (No need to explain why the information is being sought, period).
 5. Access is the rule – secrecy is the exception! - All information held by government is owned by the people. Information can be withheld only for a narrow set of legitimate reasons per international law and as codified in national law, not the Indemnity-weak Ghana Constitution of 1992.
 6. The freedom applies to all public bodies - The public has a right to receive information in the possession of any institution (government agency, police, military, chiefs, public corporations, etc.) funded by public and private bodies performing public functions or selling/buying anything.
 7. Making requests should be simple, speedy, and free - The only requirements should be to supply a name, address and description of the information sought. Requestors should be able to file requests in writing or orally in each regional capital, at the minimum. Information should be provided immediately or within a short time-frame, cost limited to cost to reproduce information.
 8. Officials are obliged to assist requestors - Public officials should assist requestors. If a request is submitted to the wrong public body, officials should transfer the request to the appropriate body without delay, and inform the requester.
 9. Refusals must be justified - Governments may only withhold information from public access if disclosure would cause demonstrable harm to legitimate interests, such as national security or privacy. These exceptions must be clearly and specifically defined by law. Reasons must be given for all refusals, documented, and archived.
 10. The public interest can take precedence over secrecy - Information must be released when the public interest outweighs any harm in releasing it. Citizens should expect that information about threats to the environment, health, or human rights, and information revealing corruption, will be released given the high public interest.
 11. Everyone has freedom to appeal an adverse decision - All requestors have the right to a prompt and effective judicial review of a public body’s refusal or failure to disclose information.
 12. Public bodies should proactively publish core information - Every public body should make readily available information about its functions and responsibilities and an index of the information it holds, without need for a request. This information should be current, clear, and in plain language.
 13. The FOI bill should be guaranteed by an independent body - An independent agency, such as an ombudsperson, a commissioner, or Inspector-General should be established to review refusals, promote awareness, and advance the public’s access to public information. (No minister or bureaucrat is wise enough, important enough, impartial enough, to act as the final, sole, arbiter).
 14. The Ghana FOI bill is inevitable - You can bet your bottom NPP cedi that the FOI bill is coming to Ghana. It is only a matter of time, and by whose effort! FOIB - Deal with it now!
 RE-WIND - FORWARD: FOIB - Too much, too much, too much, Mr. Political, are you pickable? (Read all about it at www.GhanaHero.com!).
 Prof Lungu Tokyo, Japan 27 June 08"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"373"	2008-06-25	"Accra, June 26, GNA- Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, flag bearer of the ruling New Patriotic Party (NPP), for the 2008 Election, on Thursday said if elected as President of Ghana, the passage of Right to Information Bill would be fast-tracked within the early months of his administration.
He said \"The passage of the RTI Bill would enforce other intervention by government especially the Whistleblowers Law in the fight against corruption\".
Nana Akufo-Addo was speaking at the political platform created by Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA) in collaboration with Ghana Broadcasting Corporation and Joy FM an Accra based radio station. The programme dubbed: \"An Evening Encounter,\" would provide all flag bearers with representation in Parliament a sole platform to share their campaign messages and answer questions from the electorates based on the messages presented. On the economy, Nana Addo said he was committed to developing a modern society where the economy would grow at 10 per cent growth rate, improve the time for processing business applications and reduce the time for doing business in Ghana. The government according to him will irrigate the northern part of the country and the Accra planes to increase food production and reduce hunger in the country.
Nana Akufo-Addo said the Northern part of Ghana was capable of being the bread basket of West Africa and stressed that adding value to the country's raw materials would be pursued vigorously. He said the country's development would remain at subsistence level unless serious efforts were made to add value to raw materials. Nana Akufo-Addo pledged to use his understanding of both French and English to fast-track regional integration to create market for Ghana. The NPP flag bearer said: \"I will be action oriented, demanding results, chase progress reject bureaucracy\", he noted. Nana Akufo-Addo said he would enforce zoning regulations to ensure proper planning of towns and cities with provisions made for parks, schools and other recreational facilities. He said would be support real estate developers to construct affordable houses to augment the efforts of government and about 20,000 sanitation inspectors would be deployed to deal with the problem of sanitation.
Nana Akufo-Addo called on all Ghanaians to contribute to the success of the 2008 Election since the world would be watching Ghana. Asked whether the incarceration of former Chief Executive of the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation, Mr Tsatsu Tsikata in the absence of his lawyer amounted to a violation of his human rights, Nana Akufo-Addo, a constitutional lawyer, said it was legally acceptable for the court to take its decisions in the absence of defence counsels. The NPP flag berarer said the trial judge in the case, Mrs Justice Henritta Abban, was as a respected member of the bench and did not think the judge would take any irresponsible decision being a refined criminal lawyer herself.
He noted, however, that if the decision of the court violated Mr. Tsikata's human rights, \"that was unfortunate because the courts in our country should protect our rights not violate them\". Dr Edward Mahama, flag bearer of the Peoples National Convention (PNC), would complete the Evening Encounter programme on 3rd July. The Coalition on the Right to Information in Ghana at recent National Advocacy training workshop urged President John Agyekum Kufuor to ensure the passage of the bill to serve as a farewell legacy to round off the eight year administration of the NPP. The Coalition said democracy thrived on transparency; therefore, open governance must be supported and extended at a practical level as an absolute priority.
It said passing the Right to Information Bill and implementing an effective access to information regime was a simple, but extremely useful step towards entrenching good governance. The Coalition membership included Ghana National Association of Teachers (GNAT), Ghana Journalists Association, (GJA), Commonwealth Human Rights Initiatives, Media Foundation for West Africa, Ghana Bar Association (GBA), Ghana Centre for Democratic Development (CDD), Public Archives Administration and Records Department, and Third World Network. Others were; Institute for Democratic Governance (IDEG), Ghana News Agency, (GNA), Ghana Medical Association (GMA), Ghana National Education Campaign Coalition, Amnesty International Ghana Section, Institute for Information and Development, Ghana Integrity International and Bawku Literary Initiatives. 26 June 08"	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
"374"	2008-06-23	"Accra, June 24, GNA - The realization of the importance of the right to information and the desire to ensure that there is transparency in governance, constitute the foundation for empowering the citizenry to contribute to good governance and rapid development and progress of the country.
However, the Right to Information (RTI) needs to be qualified in accordance with the 1992 Constitution.
This is part of the Memorandum to the Bill by Mr. Joe Ghartey, Attorney-General and Minister for Justice.
In the Memorandum on the RTI Bill made available to the Ghana News Agency in Accra on Tuesday, the Attorney-General explained that Article 12 (2) subjected the enjoyment of the human rights provisions in Chapter Five to the rights and freedoms of others and the public interest. In addition, Article 21 (1) (f) specifically subjected the right to information \"to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society,\" Mr Ghartey stated.
The Attorney-General said the underlying factor in the qualifications to the right to information was the need to protect the safety and integrity of the State and the privacy of individuals.
Explaining the rationale for the numerous exemptions in the Bill, Mr. Ghartey said the provision for the exemptions and protection had been taken to make them relate to specific circumstances and situations and to make them address specific pressing social needs so as to ensure that loopholes which will be taken advantage of to whittle away the right of access in the implementation of the law were not available. The Bill deals with two broad subject areas, the first area dealing with information held by government agencies, and the second area with general and miscellaneous matters.
He said Clause 1 provided for access to official information held by a government agency. Except for information specified as exempt information, a person has a right of access to information held by government agencies and does not need to give a reason for the request for access, unless that person requests that the application be treated with urgency. Other areas of exemptions in the Bill cover information submitted or meant for submission to the President or the Vice President, Cabinet and official information of the Cabinet which has not been published or released to the public, as well as decisions, deliberations and discussions of the Cabinet.
In spite of the exemption from disclosure of information relating to the Cabinet, the Cabinet has the power to grant access to information relating to its work. This is another provision intended to enhance transparency in governance.
Other exemptions relate to law enforcement, public safety and national security, information that is likely to damage or prejudice the relationship between Ghana and any other country or an international organization, in the defence of the country or of a friendly foreign country, and the economic or financial interest of the country. Confidential information which would reveal a trade secret or which relates to research, scientific, technical or commercial subjects or to labour which disclosure would prejudice the economic or financial interests of a person or group of persons is also exempted. Information relating to a tax return or for the purpose of determining tax liability, the rights of third parties in respect of information held by government agencies, which affects the interests of the third parties are exempted.
Information contained in internal working documents of an agency which relates to an opinion or advice given or a report or recommendation made or consultation or deliberation held in the course of making a decision in the agency is exempt from disclosure in so far as the disclosure will frustrate the decision making process of the agency.
Also exempt from disclosure is privileged information the disclosure of which would infringe or contravene a parliamentary privilege or constitute a contempt of court or of a quasi-judicial body; infringe on lawyer and client professional relationship or communication between spouses whether married under an enactment or under the common law. Confidential communication between a doctor or any other medical expert and a patient in connection with the patient's medical diagnosis or treatment are also exempted. Other exemptions are information that relates to unreasonable disclosure of the personal affairs of an individual, whether dead or alive. The exemptions from disclosure are subject to the public interest and can be lifted where disclosure would help reveal a contravention or a failure to comply with a law or non-disclosure could result in an imminent and serious risk to public safety, health or the environment."	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
