PRESS RELEASE: PARLIAMENT, GOOD PEOPLE OF GHANA, WHAT KIND OF RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) LAW WILL WE GET?

The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) Ghana wishes to draw the attention of the Members of Parliament of the Republic of Ghana and of the Ghanaian public to the following observations:

Parliament and Government have failed us! Despite being part of the Government’s previous manifesto in 2008 already, the Right to Information Bill was presented to Parliament with over a year’s delay in 2010 and has still not been passed! This is so notwithstanding the fact that the Majority Leader of Parliament, Mr. Clement Avoka, assured the whole nation on 18th June 2012 that Parliament will pass the Bill into law before it went on recess at the end of July 2012.

During its four year term, which is gradually coming to an end, Government has not fulfilled its promise of a RTI law. It appears the Joint Committee has not even concluded its report on the Bill for the consideration of the full House of Parliament. Instead, the fight against corruption and therefore the passage of the RTI Bill has become part of the NDC’s new manifesto, as read out by President Mahama in Ho on the 4th of October 2012 and repeated during the IEA Presidential Debate on 18th October 2012. This clearly shows that Government does not intend to keep its promise to pass the RTI Bill.

What does the RTI Bill actually contain now? Has anybody seen it? But even if Government intended and tried to keep its promise, what kind of RTI law would we get?

The version that was reviewed and commented on by the Ghanaian public between July and August last year raised many concerns, such as the numerous and broad exemptions contained in the Bill, the lack of an independent information commission to implement the new law and a fair, accessible and effective appeals-process, the need for a clear and affordable fee-structure and reasonable time-lines to name but a few. In the light of these defects of the current Bill, the Coalition has no doubt that if the Bill is passed into law without the necessary amendments it would rather undermine the people’s right to access information. And despite promises to the contrary by the Joint Committee, the Coalition has tangible reason to doubt that the necessary amendments have been or will be made to the Bill, given the attitude and posture of members of the Joint Committee.

In the view of the Coalition, a good and effective right to information law is one of the cardinal foundations of our democratic edifice and constitutional architecture. It is an essential mechanism for promoting openness, transparency, accountability and good governance. It is equally a major tool in checking grand corruption in public life, a canker that is eating away the very fabric of our society and the aspirations of our people for a life worthy of human beings.

What will Parliament do in their last session of the year? Given the little time left to pass an effective RTI law that promotes transparency, accountability and participation, and the fact that our parliamentarians currently have matters related to election politics and campaigning at the fore of their mind and attention, the Coalition is of the considered view that the RTI Bill, if passed now, would not contain the necessary amendments and therefore not be in the interest of our country and the demands of transparency, accountability and the fight against corruption.

Don’t just pass it — do justice to the importance of an effective RTI law! The RTI Bill is too critical a piece of legislation simply to be rushed through Parliament for the purpose of meeting a manifesto promise. It requires the full and informed attention of Parliament. It should be handled with care with the interest of the people of Ghana being paramount!

In order to do justice to both the concerns of the good people of Ghana and the democratic development of our country, the proposed amendments must be made to the RTI Bill before it gets passed into law. Instead of concentrating on your campaign for another term, for which the RTI Bill has been included in the manifesto or instead of rushing through the passage of the RTI Bill now only to meet one of your 2008 promises, Honorable Parliamentarians, please set your priorities right! Please focus on this crucial part of the legislation now - not in a potential next term - and make the necessary amendments to the Bill, as requested by your voters! This would be in the supreme interest of the country.

Members of Parliament, do not pass a mutilated Bill into law, which then becomes a major constraint to the people's right to know and to information, just to meet one of the commitments in the NDC 2008 manifesto. Rather, we call on you to pass a law that meets the necessary standards for a democratic country as Ghana deserves and strives to be.

An RTI Bill without the necessary amendments is a veritable deathtrap to the right to information!!!

Nana Oye Lithur Convener of the Coalition on the Right to Information, Ghana

