Press Statement by Right to Information (RTI) Coalition on the State of the RTI Bill in Parliament of Ghana

Good morning ladies and gentlemen, on 7th May 2012, the Majority Leader of Ghana’s Parliament, Honorable Cletus Avoka publicly stated on a radio station that passage of the RTI Bill is not a priority for Parliament. He stated that the Petroleum Revenue and Commission Bills were more of a priority. Then on Wednesday 16th May 2012, the Honorable Majority Leader held a Press Conference to respond to concerns raised about the delay of Parliament in passing the bill.

In responding those concerns, the Majority Leader stated that the RTI Coalition is part of the problem for the delay in passing the Bill and that the Coalition had delayed in submitting its proposals for a review of the relevant clauses in the Bill and this has partly grounded the work of Parliament.

The RTI Coalition finds it regrettable, that the Majority Leader is blaming the Coalition for Parliament’s delay in passing the Bill. There is ample evidence to show that the Coalition has consistently provided technical and other support to Parliament and all the relevant stakeholders throughout the RTI Bill’s legislative process.

Since the process begun in 2003, the Coalition has supported it at the Attorney General‘s Department level, and when it was submitted to Cabinet for consideration and adoption and subsequently to Parliament. It has also supported the processes at the Joint Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs level.

The Coalition submitted a detailed memorandum on the Bill to Parliament in April 2010. It has followed this with distributing two hundred and thirty (230) copies of the Coalition’s publication containing a clause by clause commentary on the RTI Bill to all Members of Parliament in April 2010. It has also distributed two hundred and thirty (230) leaflets of ‘Why you need the RTI Bill’ and other RTI literature material to Parliament.

Apart from resource materials on RTI, the Coalition has had several engagements with Parliament since the Bill was laid in March 2010. The Coalition held a workshop with 32 members of the Joint Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Bill on June 9th 2010 at the Kofi Annan Centre. It has held a series of breakfast and roundtable discussions with the Subsidiary Legislative Committee, the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, the Parliamentary Committee on Poverty Reduction and the Public Accounts Committee.

The Coalition has also had one-on-one engagements with members of Parliament which include lobby meetings with Honorable Cletus Avoka on 8th March 2012, Honorable Osei Kyei Mensah Bonsu- Minority Leader on 8th March 2012, Honorable Professor Mike Ocquaye —Second Deputy Speaker of Parliament on 7" February 2012, Honorable Dr. Annan, Honorable Maxwell Kofi Jumah, Honorable Ahmed Ibrahim, Honorable Muntaka Mubarak, Honorable Kwame Osei Prempeh, Honorable Abubakar Sumani to mention but few of the MPs we have lobbied. 

In all ladies and gentlemen, the Coalition has been able to reach out to all the two hundred and thirty (230) members of Ghana’s Parliament through the distribution of its RTI educational materials and have had personal interaction with 105 members of Parliament on the Right to Information Bill through our advocacy activities. Our regional networks in the regions of Ghana have also interacted with Parliamentarians at the constituency level in the respective regions.

On March 17, 2012 and with the support of the World Bank, we facilitated a Parliamentary meeting on the regional consultations. Subsequently, the Coalition has prepared and forwarded an expert opinion on the Bill to the World Bank on 7th May, 2012. Copies of the expert opinion with the World Bank’s authorization, were forwarded to Parliament on 21th May 2012 and made available to the Majority and Minority leaders, and members of the Joint Committee.

We are assuring Ghanaians and Parliamentarians that the RTI Coalition is committed to supporting the legislative making processes, Whilst we are committed to seeing the passage of the Bill without any further delay, we are not simply interested in passing any Bill into law. Equally important for us is the need to pass into law, a bill that meets international standards and best practices, and enhances transparency, accountability and open government.

We offer our full support and will cooperate with Parliament to ensure that the Right to Information Bill is passed before the 5th Parliament of the Republic of Ghana lapses on 7th January 2013.

We urge the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Communication and Constitutional, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to, without any further delays, expedite action on its Report for submission to the House for consideration and adoption.

There is no single legislation in Ghana's political history that has the potential of entrenching democracy, transparency and accountability and promoting development like a credible and effective RTI legislation. This is well echoed in the words of no other person than Kofi Annan, our own celebrated international statesman.

“The great democratizing power of information has given us all the chance to effect change and alleviate poverty in ways we cannot even imagine today. Our task... is to make that change real for those in needs, wherever they may be. With information on our side, with knowledge a potential for all, the path to poverty can be reversed.” ~ Kofi Annan, former UN Secretary-General

Thank you. Issued by the Right to Information Coalition 22 May, 2012

