COMMONWEALTH HUMAN RIGHTS INITIATIVE CALLS ON GOVERNMENT TO MAKE THE PASSAGE OF THE RIGT TO INFORMATION BILL A PRIORITY.

In a Government...where all the agents of the public must be responsible for their conduct, there can be but few secrets. The people... have a right to know every public act, everything that is done in a public way, by their public functionaries... The responsibility of officials to explain or to justify their acts is the chief safeguard against oppression and corruption”- Justice K. K. Mathew, Supreme Court of India

The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) an international non-governmental organization with a strong reputation in human rights advocacy throughout the Commonwealth, Ghana, and Africa as a whole wishes to register its dismay at the statement made by the Honorable Cletus Avoka, Majority Leader in Parliament during an interview on JOY FM news segment “News Night” on May 7 2012 that the Right to Information Bill is not a priority of the House.

The right to information is a fundamental human right guaranteed by the 1992 Constitution and is recognised as a right by international conventions on human rights. Article 21(1) (f) of the Constitution provides that ‘All persons have the right to information subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society”.

Our choice of democratic governance as a country entails an active participation by all in the governance of the country. In this participatory democracy, the right to information is at the centre because it ensures effective participation by an informed citizenry and accountability of public officials and thereby good governance. This realisation of the importance of the right to information and the desire to ensure that there is transparency in governance constitutes the foundation for empowering the citizenry to make informed decisions to the rapid development and progress of the country.

It is therefore shocking that the Hon. Majority Leader confidently announced to the Ghanaian public that the right to information was not as important a bill as other bills present before the house i.e, the Petroleum Management Bill and Petroleum Commission Bill among others. From his statement, it is evident that the August house was not ready to make themselves accountable to the people. Without access to information how can the people hold their leaders accountable?

The National Democratic Congress (NDC) during its campaign manifesto in 2008 captured at page 24 the following commitment: ‘The new NDC Government shall enact into law freedom of information bill to facilitate access to official information’’. However since the Mills Government assumed office, it has not lived up to its campaign promise. CHRI is of the view that the right to access information is a pre-condition to good governance and realisation of all other human rights. 

Instead of depending on vague suppositions and assumptions, people armed with sound and factual information have the confidence to act in their own interest. How, therefore can the legal framework that will give force and voice to Article 1 (f) of the 1992 Constitution not be a priority of the peoples’ elected representatives?

CHRI is therefore calling on all well-meaning Ghanaians who have the nation at heart to add their voices to demand that their elected representatives who sought their mandate, and some of whom will be seeking their mandate again in December 2012 give meaning to the peoples’ right to access information by debating and passing an effective and efficient RTI Bill into law.

The Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, Africa Office

