AFRICA FREEDOM OF INFORMATION CENTRE AND GHANA RIGHT TO INFORMATION COALITION JOINT STATEMENT ON GHANA’S RIGHT TO INFORMATION BILL

The Africa Freedom of Information Centre (AFIC) and the Ghana Right to Information Coalition (GRIC) applaud the government of the Republic of Ghana for demonstrating resolve to deepen transparency and good governance as a means of improving the living conditions of Ghanaians. The Government has commitment under its Open Government Partnership (OGP) action plan to pass an access to information legislation; a commitment that was re-echoed by President John Dramani Mahama in July 2013 when he stated that he wants to run “an open government”. Ghana is one of 18 African countries with constitutional guarantees on the right to information. The Constitution of Ghana, in its Article 21 (F), reads:

21 All persons shall have the right to — Information, subject to such qualifications and laws as are necessary in a democratic society

AFIC and GRIC congratulate the government of Ghana for taking active steps to operationalise this important constitutional provision by tabling in Parliament the Right to Information Bill. Furthermore, we welcome the decision of the government to publish this Bill to provide space for civil society, ordinary Ghanaians and concerned persons to make input; a move which demonstrates once more the desire to pass a law that will achieve its intended purpose.

An effective right to information law grants citizens the information they need to form opinion about the decisions public officials make on their behalf, it cultivates trust between institutions and those they serve, strengthens accountability of elected officials, promotes the rule of law and protects genuine whistleblowers from persecution of any kind.

Ghana’s Right to Information Bill has progressive provisions such as: - A public interest over ride function applicable to information that is exempt. (Section 18); - The law recognizes the right of internal review which enables an aggrieved requester to seek redress internally before proceeding to court (Section 38) - An obligation for public agencies to report on implementation of the law (Section 55)

While we applaud the above provisions and several others in the draft law; we believe this law could be strengthened if some key provisions were reviewed to reflect regional standards and best practices as expounded in the African Union Model Law and the African Platform on Access to Information (APAI) Declaration.

AFIC and the Ghana Right to Information Coalition hereby call upon the Rt. Hon. Edward Doe Adjaho, Speaker of Parliament and Members of the Parliament of Ghana to consider the following recommendations for strengthening Ghana’s Right to Information Bill:

Recommendation 1: Section one of the Bill should be amended to provide for the applicability of the law to the private sector.

This recommendation is reflected in Section 3 of the AU Model law and Principle 4 of the APAI Declaration and is necessary because many private bodies receive subventions from the State or provide services on behalf of government and should therefore be accountable to the public;

Recommendation 2: Section 3 of the Bill should be amended to remove the requirement for sector ministers to consult on every publication of the manual. Guidelines issued for compilation of manuals may be sufficient to provide guidance in developing manuals;

Recommendation 3: Sections 5 and 6 should be amended to remove exemptions of information held by the president, vice president, and blanket protection of cabinet records.

The best practice is information should be protected on the basis of the type of information and not the holder/bearer of that information;

Recommendation 4: On Section 7, we recommend that reference be made in its formulation to the Global Principles on National Security and the Right to Information (The Tshwane Principles) as well as Section 30 of the AU Model Law on Access to Information;

Recommendation 5: The Bill should be revised to clearly state that information is not for sale and requesters will only be charged a minimal fee to facilitate reproduction of a record; for example photocopying. Reference should be made to Section 23 of the AU Model Law on access to information.

Recommendation 6: Section 63 should be amended to propose the establishment of an independent oversight body such as an Information Commission for purposes of promotion, monitoring and protection of the right to information. (Section 45 of the AU Model Law and Principle 9 of the APAI Declaration)

Experience elsewhere on the continent suggests that having line ministries supervise implementation of the law has not been effective. 

Recommendation 7: Regarding appeals, the Bill in its present form requires requesters to go to the Supreme Court. Considering the cost involved and the pace of the court system, the best practice is to appeal to an independent body once internal appeal is exhausted. A decision of an independent body could be subject to a judicial review at more accessible courts as the Magistrate’s Court (AU Model Law Section 83)