PRESS RELEASE ON MAY DAY CELEBRATIONS Pensions: It is your Right and Responsibility

The Coalition on the Right to Information (RTI) - Ghana, would like to wish all workers and organised labour a happy Workers Day.

The Coalition believes that this year’s theme for the celebration, ‘Pensions: It is your Right and Responsibility’ is appropriate and timely considering the challenges faced by the Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SNNIT), which year after year complain about the lack of compliance by employers in the payment of employees’ contributions. Pension entitlement is the right of every employee after a long period of work and the responsibility of every employer. The issue however is whether individuals, be it employees or employers have adequate information about this right and responsibility.

As a result of inadequate information on pensions most workers do not know about their entitlements and claims. Further, numerous criticism on the way the Pensions’ fund of the second tier have been invested over the last year tend to bring some uncertainty about the viability of the new Scheme. This was confirmed in a statement attributed to the Executive Secretary of the National Pensions Regulatory Authority, Mr. Sam Pee Yalley when he commented on the problems facing the new three-tier pension scheme; a scheme introduced by the Pension’s Act about three years ago to reform the pension system in the country. According to statement, he said among others that....low scheme registration rate, lack of proper data on the scheme, unwanted and ill informed criticisms are some of the challenges facing the new scheme introduced to enhance pensions.

Such issues are one of the reasons the Coalition on Right to Information has for the past ten years been fighting for the passage of an effective RTI law which will provide maximum disclosure of information to citizens when the need arises.The National Pensions Act 766, 2008 requires all employers to deduct 5 1/2 % from the salary of every worker in an establishment immediately at the end of the month with the employer’s 13% contribution for onwards payment to the pension authority to credit the employee’s account This is to contribute towards this entitlement irrespective of whether or not the salary is actually paid to the worker.

The RTI is the touchstone for all other fundamental human rights and as such the need for it is as important as that of any basic right. There is, therefore, the need for workers to be well informed on their pensions’ rights and responsibilities in order to hold their employers, including Government accountable. The need for citizens to know will not only enlighten them but will also promote democracy and development. For Ghana to reach its development heights it needs to transform into a knowledge based society and this can only be achieved with the existence of an effective RTI law.The Coalition believes that the passage and implementation of an effective RTI law will positively affect all aspects of an individual’s life, including worker’s pensions.

Ghana’s RTI Bill was first drafted in 2002 and laid before Parliament in 2010 but has since not been passed into Law. Numerous activities have been conducted by the Coalition towards the passage of an efficient Bill, yet to no avail. The President, His Excellency John Dramani Mahama on several occasions, has publicly proclaimed that he wants the RTI Bill passed into law. However, according to the Standing Orders of Parliament, all un-passed Bills before the House at the end of its term of office revert to Cabinet to be re-submitted to the next Parliament, The term of the 6th Parliament of the 4th Republic of Ghana elapsed in January 2013; hence the RTI Bill has reverted to Cabinet of which the President is the head. It is, therefore, the responsibility of Cabinet to expedite action on the process towards its passage by presenting it before the new Parliament.

The Coalition is, therefore, urging Government to “Walk the Talk”. We also call on all organised labour and workers in general to add their voices to the call for the amendment and passage of the RTI Bill into law now.

“When you know better you do better.” Maya Angelou -an American poet and Civil Rights activists

Thank You Issued by the Right to Information Coalition

